
--- Page 1 ---
JournalofThrombosisandHaemostasis,13:101–110 DOI:10.1111/jth.12771
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
2+
Plasma free fatty acid levels influence Zn -dependent
–
histidine-rich glycoprotein heparin interactions via an
allosteric switch on serum albumin
O. KASSAAR,* U. SCHWARZ-LINEK,† C. A. BLINDAUER‡ and A. J. STEWART*
*SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofStAndrews;†BiomedicalSciencesResearchComplex,UniversityofStAndrews,StAndrews;and
‡DepartmentofChemistry,UniversityofWarwick,Coventry,UK
Tocitethisarticle:KassaarO,Schwarz-LinekU,BlindauerCA,StewartAJ.PlasmafreefattyacidlevelsinfluenceZn2+-dependenthistidine-rich
glycoprotein–heparininteractionsviaanallostericswitchonserumalbumin.JThrombHaemost2015;13:101–10.
Speciation modeling of plasma Zn2+ based on the data
Summary.Background:Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) obtained suggests that FFA-mediated displacement of
regulates coagulation through its ability to bind and neu- Zn2+ from serum albumin would be likely to contribute
tralize heparins. HRG associates with Zn2+ to stimulate to the development of thrombotic complications in indi-
HRG–heparin complex formation. Under normal condi- viduals with high plasma FFA levels.
tions, the majority of plasma Zn2+ associates with human
serum albumin (HSA). However, free fatty acids (FFAs) Keywords: fatty acids; heparin; histidine-rich glycoprotein;
allosterically disrupt Zn2+ binding to HSA. Thus, high plasma albumin; zinc.
levels of circulating FFAs, as are associated with diabetes,
obesity, and cancer, may increase the proportion of
plasma Zn2+ associated with HRG, contributing to an Introduction
increased risk of thrombotic disease. Objectives:To char-
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a plasma adaptor
acterize Zn2+ binding by HRG, examine the influence
that FFAs have on Zn2+ binding by HSA, and establish protein present at a concentration of 1.3–2.0 l M in adult
blood [1,2]. HRG natively exists as a dimer, forming
whether FFA-mediated displacement of Zn2+ from HSA
may influence HRG–heparin complex formation. Meth- multiprotein complexes that regulate coagulation and
other biological processes, including immune complex
ods:Zn2+ binding to HRG and to HSA in the presence
clearance, cell proliferation, cell adhesion, and angiogene-
of different FFA (myristate) concentrations were exam-
sis [1]. This has led to its description as ‘the Swiss army
ined by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and the
knife of mammalian plasma’ [3]. High levels of HRG are
formation of HRG–heparin complexes in the presence of
associated with the clinical presentation of cardiovascular
different Zn2+ concentrations by both ITC and ELISA.
disorders, including blood vessel occlusion and thrombo-
Results and conclusions:We found that HRG possesses 10
Zn2+ sites (K0 = 1.63 9 105) and that cumulative binding philia [4–6]. HRG thus seems to play a particularly
important role in regulating blood clotting. The primary
of FFA to HSA perturbed its ability to bind Zn2+. Also
structure of HRG contains two cystatin-like domains at
Zn2+ binding was shown to increase the affinity with
the N-terminus, a histidine-rich region (HRR) flanked by
which HRG interacts with unfractionated heparins, but
two proline-rich regions, and a C-terminal domain [7,8].
had no effect on its interaction with low molecular weight
The distinctive HRR is composed of repeating GHHPH
heparin (~ 6850 Da). [Correction added on 1 December
motifs [1]. This domain associates with Zn2+ to alter the
2014, after first online publication: In the preceding
binding characteristics of the protein, such that the affin-
sentence, “6850 kDa” was corrected to “6850 Da”.]
ity of HRG for a number of molecules, including the
natural anticoagulants heparin and heparan sulfate, is
Correspondence: Alan J. Stewart, Medical and Biological Sciences increased [9]. This, in turn, enables neutralization of these
Building, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews anticoagulants, leading to a prothrombotic effect via
KY169TF,UK.
inhibition of antithrombin III activity [10,11]. Thus,
Tel.:+441334463546;fax:+441334467470. Zn2+ binding by HRG provides a potential means of
E-mail:ajs21@st-andrews.ac.uk.
regulating its function. An anticoagulatory role for
Zn2+–HRG has also been suggested, as Zn2+ can poten-
Received25September2014
tiate the binding of HRG to factor XIIa [12], but this is
Manuscripthandledby:R.Camire
Finaldecision:P.H.Reitsma,21October2014 less clear.
© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on
ThrombosisandHaemostasis.
ThisisanopenaccessarticleunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense,
whichpermitsuse,distributionandreproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited.
--- Page 2 ---
102 O.Kassaaretal
Indeed, plasma Zn2+ has emerged as an important reg-
A
ulator of hemostasis and thrombosis [13]. Zinc deficiency
is associated with defects in platelet aggregation and
increased bleeding times, effects that can be reversed with
zinc supplementation [14–17]. Plasma Zn2+ levels are
highly regulated, and under normal conditions ~ 75% of
the total 20 l M plasma Zn2+ (~ 15 l M) is bound to
serum albumin [18], and not to HRG [19]. Much of the
remaining 5–6 l M Zn2+ in plasma is strongly bound to
other proteins (such as a -macroglobulin), with the con-
2
centration of free/exchangeable (weakly bound) Zn2+ in
plasma thought to be in the nanomolar range [20,21]. It
is thought that Zn2+ release from platelet-derived a-gran-
ules may provide enough Zn2+ locally to modify
HRG–heparin interactions and aid in the initiation of
coagulation [11,22]. Mahdi et al. [23] reported that the
free Zn2+ concentration close to activated platelets is 7–
10 l M, and may be even higher in the growing thrombus. B
Despite this, the Zn2+-binding properties of HRG and
the role that Zn2+ plays in influencing HRG–heparin
interactions are not fully understood. N99
Previously, we identified the primary Zn2+-binding site
on serum albumin (often referred to as site A), which H247
consists of N-ligands from His67 and His247 and H67
D249
O-ligands from Asn99, Asp249, and H O [24,25]. Serum
2
albumin transports fatty acids in the circulation, and binds
non-esterified fatty acids [termed free fatty acids [FFAs])
Myr2
of various chain lengths, ranging from C10 to C24, at five
high-affinity sites (termed FA1–FA5) and several lower-
affinity sites [26–28]. Fatty acid binding at site FA2
induces a conformational switch that disengages the Zn2+-
binding residues in domain II relative to those in domain I
[24,29], as shown in Fig. 1. Under normal physiologic
conditions, the plasma concentration of FFAs is ~ 250– Fig.1. Thefattyacid/Zn2+switchonserumalbumin.(A)Overlay
ofcrystalstructuresofhumanserumalbuminwith(gray;Protein
500 l M at rest [30]. This represents < 1 mole equivalent DataBank[PDB]1BJ5[26])andwithout(green; PDB1AO6[61])
(mol eq.) relative to the plasma concentration of serum myristate(Myr)bound,showingthelocationofthemajorZn2+-
albumin. However, FFA levels are dynamic and, for bindingsite.(B)Close-upshowingthemovementofZn2+-coordinat-
instance, rise following meals and during periods of exer- ingresiduesHis247andAsp249relativetoHis67andAsn99between
thetwostructures.
cise. Crucially, elevated FFA levels are alsoassociated with
a range of disorders, including obesity [31,32], diabetes
[33], fatty liver disease [34], and cancer [35]. For example, using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and an
in obese individuals, plasma concentrations of FFA (at ELISA-based method. Furthermore, we used ITC to
rest) are often two to three times higher [32], and in some examine whether plasma FFA levels may regulate the
cancer patients they are four to six times higher, than in Zn2+-dependent HRG–heparin interactions (via Zn2+
controls [36]. Such disorders are associated with an displacement from serum albumin) to probe the interac-
increased risk of thrombotic complications [37,38]. For tive binding of myristate (Myr) and Zn2+ to serum albu-
example, thromboembolism (caused by obstructive blood min. Myr was used because it balances solubility issues
clots) is the second leading cause of death associated with with an ability to still bind to serum albumin in a manner
malignancy [37]. Collectively, these observations led us to that closely matches that of the more physiologically rele-
hypothesize that, under conditions where FFA levels are vant palmitate (C16) and stearate (C18) [26], albeit with
elevated, Zn2+ displaced from serum albumin could bind slightly weaker affinity [40]. Zn2+-speciation modeling
HRG to enhance its interaction with heparin/heparan based on the resultant data suggests that the maintenance
sulfateand induce a procoagulatoryeffect [39]. of FFA levels and/or free/exchangeable plasma Zn2+ lev-
With this in mind, we sought to gain a fuller under- els would probably provide new avenues for therapeutic
standing of the Zn2+-binding properties of HRG and the intervention in managing thrombotic complications in
role of Zn2+ in controlling HRG–heparin interactions by high-risk individuals.
©2014TheAuthors.JournalofThrombosisandHaemostasispublishedbyWileyPeriodicals,Inc.onbehalfofInternationalSocietyon
ThrombosisandHaemostasis.
--- Page 3 ---
FFAlevelsinfluenceHRG-heparinbinding 103
yielded good fits, but physically unreasonable data for the
Materials and methods
latter values (but still resulted in a decrease in site A
occupancy). Hence, fits with either K2 and DH2 fixed at
Purificationof human andrabbitHRG
values derived from fitting the data in the absence of
HRG was purified directly from either human plasma Myr, or fits with N2 fixed at either 1 or 2, were explored
(TCS Biosciences, Buckingham, UK) or, for experiments (Tables S1 and S2). The resulting values for N1 from the
detailed in the Supporting information, rabbit serum various fits were averaged.
(Sigma-Aldrich, Poole, UK) with immobilized metal affin-
ity chromatography. Plasma or serum was centrifuged
ELISA
(4000 9 g, 30 min) and filtered through a 0.45-lm syringe
filter (Sartorius, Epsom, UK), and imidazole was added An ELISA experimental set-up was devised to investigate
(5 mM final) together with the equilibration buffer the interaction between HRG and heparin compounds.
(10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole, pH 8). A 5- Unfractionated porcine plasma heparin (Acros Organics,
mL HisTrap nickel column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Loughborough, UK) or low molecular weight heparin
Little Chalfont, UK) was equilibrated with 5–10 column (LMWH) (6850 Da; Iduron, Manchester, UK) were
volumes of the equilibration buffer, and sample (50 mL) coated overnight at room temperature onto a heparin-
was loaded. The column was washed with equilibration binding plate (Iduron) at a concentration of 25 lg mL (cid:2)1
buffer and then with a 70 : 30 mixture of equilibration/ in 50 mm HEPES, 150 mM NaCl and 0.2% Tween-20 at
elution buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 400 mM imid- pH 7.4. The wells were washed with the same buffer,
azole, pH 8). HRG was eluted with elution buffer. The and then blocked with the same buffer supplemented
purified HRG sample was then dialyzed to remove any with 0.2% gelatin from fish skin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h
bound metals in the buffer of choice for further experi- at 37 °C. Human HRG was then incubated for 2 h over
ments, or in 50 mM ammonium carbonate prior to lyoph- a range of concentrations (0–3 l M) at 37 °C with or
ilization. without ZnCl . The reaction was detected with primary
2
rabbit anti-HRG (Sigma-Aldrich) followed by alkaline
phosphatase-linked anti-rabbit antibody (Sigma-Aldrich),
ITC
and observed with p-nitrophenol phosphate substrate
ITC experiments were carried out with a MicroCal VP- (Sigma-Aldrich) at 405 nm.
ITC instrument (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) in 50 mM
Tris and 140 mM NaCl (pH 7.4) at 25 °C. Titrants (ZnCl
2 Speciationmodeling
and heparins) were added to the reaction buffer, and the
pH was adjusted to 7.4 to match the buffer in the ITC The ‘Species’ module of the IUPAC Stability Constants
cell containing the protein. Solutions were degassed at Database (version 5.6) was employed for speciation mod-
22 °C for 15 min prior to performance of the experiment. eling, with the conditional stability constants for HRG
Typical titrations performed were one 2-lL injection over and HSA determined in this work, and typical physio-
4 s followed by up to 55 injections of 5 lL over 10 s with logic concentrations for exchangeable Zn2+ (15 l M),
an adequate interval of 240 s between injections to allow HSA (620 l M), and HRG (1 or 2 l M). For the last of
complete equilibration. The stirring speed was 307 r.p.m. these, the binding site concentration was assumed to be
Heats of dilution were accounted for with blank titrations 10 times that of HRG, according to the stoichiometry
performed by injecting ligand solution into reaction buf- determined at high ionic strength. Averages and errors
fer and subtracting the averaged heat of dilution from the were calculated by employing various combinations of
main experiments. Alternatively, in cases of saturated values for N1, N2 and K2 for HSA corresponding to the
binding, blank titrations were omitted where the averaged fitting values (Tables S1 and S2), and two different con-
residual signal of the last injections was used to determine centrations for HRG (Table S3).
the heat of dilution. Raw data were processed with MICRO-
CAL ORIGIN software, and data were fitted by use of the
Results and discussion
same software; the results presented are representative of
multiple experiments. In all cases, the errors stated repre- We used ITC to examine the Zn2+-binding properties of
sent the fitting errors from individual experiments. human HRG purified from blood plasma. Zn2+ binding
For fitting of the human serum albumin (HSA)–Zn2+ to human HRG was exothermic, and data analysis
titration data in the presence and absence of Myr, initial revealed that human HRG is capable of binding
values for K1 and DH1 for the high-affinity site A 10 mol eq. (N = 10.3) of Zn2+ at near-physiologic ionic
ITC
were determined with a sequential binding site model. strength (50 mM Tris, 140 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) with an
Subsequent fits to determine site A occupancy used a average apparent affinity, K , of
ITC
‘two sets of sites’ model, with K1 ITC and DH1 fixed, and (8.06 (cid:3) 0.40) 9 104 M (cid:2)1 (Fig. 2). Rabbit HRG has been
N1 varied. Simultaneous variation of N2, K2 and DH2 frequently used in biochemical studies, owing to its higher
© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on
ThrombosisandHaemostasis.