
--- Page 1 ---
THROMBOSIS RESEARCH 40; 653-661, 1985
0049-3848/85 $3.00 + .OO Printed in the USA.
Copyright (c) 1985 Pergamon Press Ltd. All rights reserved.
PROTEOLYSIS OF HISTIDINE-RICH GLYCOPROTEIN IN PLASMA
AND IN PATIENTS UNDERGOING THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY
Ann Smith, Tleana Nuiry and William T. Morgan
Department of Biochemistry
Louisiana State University Medical Center
New Orleans, LA 70112
U.S.A.
(Received 3.12.1984; Accepted in revised form 20.8.1985
by Editor R.W. Colman)
ABSTRACT
Plasmin and kallikrein but not thrombin cleave purified
histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), and heparin binding inhibits
the proteolysis of HRG. To assess the proteolysis of HRG in
plasma, immunoaffinity chromatography was used to isolate HRG
from human plasma samples and the extent of protein cleavage was
determined after electrophoresis under reduced, denaturing
conditions. In blood drawn into streptokinase or into urdkinase,
HRG (78 kDa) was degraded producing peptides ranging in apparent
molecular weight from 67 to 9 kDa. In patients undergoing
thrombolytic therapy almost no intact HRG remains after 30
minutes, but the levels of circulating HRG are unchanged,
indicating that cleaved HRG is not quickly or extensively removed
from the circulation.
INTRODUCTION
Thrombolytic therapy of conditions such as venous thrombosis,
occlusive vascular disease and disseminated intravascular coagulation
utilizes plasminogen actfvators like tissue plasminogen activator (TPA),
streptokinase (SK) and urokinase (UK). Although these agents have long
been in clinical use, the side effects of this therapy have yet to be
fully assessed.
Recent evidence suggests that histidine-rich glycocoprotein (HRG) is
an anti-fibrinolytic agent which acts by binding to the primary lysine-
binding site of plasminogen (1). Interestingly, HRG binds to heparin
counteracting its anticoagulant properties (2,3) and alleviates the
inhibition by heparin of thrombin-induced platelet aggregration in vitro
--
Key words: Histidine-rich glycoprotein, thromholytic therapy, plasmin,
immunoaffinity chromatography
653
--- Page 2 ---
654 PROTEOLYSIS OF HRG Vol. 40, No. 5
(4). Since HRG is cleaved by plasmin in vitro (5,6), increased plasmin
activity caused by thrombolytic therapy couldaffect circulating HRG with
possible deleterious consequences.
Immunoelectrophoresis (5' and immunodiffusIon (see below) with
polyclonal anti-sera and gel permeation chromatography (7) do not
distinguish proteolytically-cleaved RRG from the intact protein in
plasma. Therefore, in this work immunoaffinity chromatography was used to
isolate HRG from plasma and electrophoresis under reduced, denaturing
conditions to demonstrate the proteolysis. The results presented here are
the fjrst to determine the extent of proteolytic cleavage of HRG in
normal plasma -i-n vitro and
-
i
-
n viva in patients undergoing thrombolytic
therapy.
MATERJALS AND METHODS
Plasma was obtained from healthy volunteers after informed consent and
approval of the InstItutional Review Board for human investigation. Blood
was routinely drawn into a cocktail of protease inhibitors containing
kallikrein inhibitor (Antagosan, Behring, 400 units/ml final
concentration), benzamidine (10 mM), EGTA (10 mM) and 10 mM sodium
citrate. Red cells were removed by centrifugation at 2000 g for 20
minutes at 4OC. In experiments to assess the effects on HRG of
increased plasmin activity or of heparin, blood samples were drawn into SK
(500 units/ml plasma) or into UK (20 units/ml plasma) with and without
heparin (4.2 units/ml plasma) and incubated on ice for 1 hour. The plasma
samples were frozen in aliquots 3n liquid N2 and stored at -7O'C until
analyzed.
The three patients investigated received streptokinase therapy as an
emergency measure to remove clots obstructing major coronary blood
vessels. The clots were visualised before infusion and the patency of the
previously occluded vessels estahlished after infusion by routine
angiograms. All three patients had a previous history of myocardial
infarcts and therapy was begun within 8 hours of the onset of chest pain.
After informed consent was obtained, the patients received heparin (5000
units) to maintain patency of the catheters and a blood sample was taken
before a bolus injection of SK fpre-SK sample) foll.owedb y an infusion of
SK at a flow of about 5,000 units per minute. Tmmediately after the
infusion of SK the second blood sample was taken (post-SK sample).
Patient 1 was a 70 year old male who received 20,000 units bolus followed
by 108,000 units infused over 45 minutes. Patient 2 was a 53 year old
male who received 90,000 units bolus, 300,000 units infused into the right
coronary artery followed by a further 100,000 units bolus and 400,000
units infusion at a second clot site in the left coronary artery. Patient
3 was a 66 year old female who received 20,000 units bolus and 300,000
units infused over 60 minutes. Blood samples were drawn into the cocktail
of inhibitors described above and the plasma frozen in aliquots in liquid
N2 and stored at -7O'C until analyzed.
Human HRG was isolated by chromatography on phosphocellulose (8) or on
carboxymethylcellulose (9). The purity of HRG preparations was assessed
by slab gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecylsulphate
(SDS) fl0) using 3-17% acrylamide gradients oy 19% acrylamide. The
reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT) was included to monitor the integrity
of the protein which is extensively disulphide-linked. The concentration
--- Page 3 ---
Vol. 40, No. 5 PROTEOLYSIS OF HRG 655
of purified HRG was assessed usi an El% of 5.85 at 278 nm (11).
Iodination of purified HRG with I was carried out using Iodobeads
(Pierce), under conditions that produced incorporation of one I per
Labeling of HRG, human serum albumin and human plasminogen with I@
H2CC was accomplished by the NaCNBH3 method (12).
Mancini (13) and Ouchterlony (14) immunodiffusion techniques and
preparation of the IgG-BioGel CM-A immunoaffinity chromatography medium
(15) were carried out using monospecific polyclonal goat antibody to human
HRG. HRG levels in plasma were measured by the Mancini method as described
(22). Protein eluted from the immunoaffinity column by thiocyanate was
extensively dialyzed against water and lyophilized before
electrophoresis. The column was routinely rinsed with buffer and
thiocyanate between samples to remove any residual protein. Human HRG
isolated by immunoaffinity chromatography was subjected to polyacrylamide
electrophoresis (10) under reduced denaturing conditions using 10% or 3-
17% gradient polyacrylamide slab gels. Protein bands were detected after
electrophoresis by staining with Coomassie blue R250 or silver (16).
The "Western" blot procedure (17) was used to demonstrate that all the
protein bands in the thiocyanate-eluted fractions, after transfer to a
nitrocellulose filter, contained antigenic determinants recognized by the
antiserum produced in this laboratory. The only exceptions are two faint
bands observed in some samples that were identified as heavy (55 kDa) and
light (30 kDa) chains of goat IgG. The blotting procedure was not used
with unfractionated plasma since the large amount of albumin present
relative to HRG obscures certain fragments of HRG.
Plasminogen was isolated from human plasma (18) and activated either
with UK (Calbiochem) or SK (KABI) as described (19). Amidolytic activity
was measured using the chromogenic peptide substrate, S2251 (KABI).
Thrombin (Sigma) activity was generally 3U/ug protein, and kallikrein
(Calbiochem) activity was 0.5U/ug protein. Limited proteolytic
digestions of HRG were carried out at 37'C in 15 mM phosphate buffer, pH
7.4 containing 150 mM sodium chloride using l:lO, 1:30, 1:50 and 1:lOO
ratios by weight of protease to HRG. Incubating purified HRG with SK or
with plasminogen alone had no effect. Heparin was added where indicated 20
minutes before the enzyme. The reaction was stopped by addition of
electrophoresis solubilisation buffer containing 0.5% SDS and 10 mM DTT
and heating at 100°C for 5 minutes.
RESULTS
Purified HRG is susceptible to proteolysis by plasmin in vitro
(5,6), but little is known of the sensitivity of HRG to other zoteases
and of its cleavage in plasma. As a first step the sensitivity of
purified HRG to plasmin, thrombin and kallikrein was investigated since
these three enzymes are all serine proteases involved in hemostasis. Time
course studies of the action of plasmin on purified HRG (Figure 1) reveal
that a 9 kDa non-disulphide linked peptide is first cleaved from the 78
kDa native protein producing a 67 kDa species followed by the slower
appearance of the 60, 48, 40 and 30 kDa peptides which are the histidine-
proline-glycine-rich and -poor peptides previously reported (6) (Figure 5,
tracks 1 to 4). Thrombin does not act on HRG (Figure 1, tracks 5 and 6).
In contrast, kallikrein extensively cleaves human HRG (Figure 1, tracks 7
and 8) producing a 48 kDa peptide that is somewhat protease-resistant but
finally degraded by kallikrein (Figure 1, track 8).