
--- Page 1 ---
www.nature.com/scientificreports
open increased levels of histidine‑rich
glycoprotein are associated
with the development
of post‑thrombotic syndrome
Jakub Siudut1,2,5, Joanna Natorska1,2,5, Maksim Son3, Krzysztof Plens4 & Anetta Undas1,2*
Denser fibrin networks which are relatively resistant to lysis can predispose to post-thrombotic
syndrome (PTS). Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), a blood protein displaying antifibrinolytic
properties, is present in fibrin clots. We investigated whether HRG may affect the risk of PTS in
relation to alterations to fibrin characteristics. In venous thromboembolism (VTE) patients, we
evaluated plasma HRG levels, plasma clot permeability, maximum absorbance, clot lysis time and
maximum rate of increase in D-dimer levels released from clots after 3 months of the index event.
We excluded patients with cancer and severe comorbidities. After 2 years of follow-up, 48 patients
who developed PTS had 18.6% higher HRG at baseline. Baseline HRG positively correlated with clot
lysis time, maximum absorbance, and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) activity but
was inversely correlated with plasma clot permeability and maximum rate of increase in D-dimer
levels released from clots. On multivariate regression model adjusted for age, fibrinogen and glucose,
independent predictors of PTS were recurrent VTE, baseline HRG level, and TAFI activity. VTE recurred
in 45 patients, including 30 patients with PTS, and this event showed no association with elevated
HRG. Our findings suggest that increased HRG levels might contribute to the development of PTS, in
part through prothrombotic fibrin clot properties.
Post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS) affects as many as 23–60% of patients in the first 2 years of deep-vein throm-
bosis (DVT)1. It is a constellation of signs and symptoms of chronic deep venous insufficiency and typically
manifests as swelling, pain, peripheral oedema, venous ectasia, and in advanced cases—ulceration. The severity
is usually determined using the Villalta scale2.
PTS is thought to arise from chronic thrombotic obstruction of the deep veins leading to venous hyperten-
sion, exacerbated by valvular incompetence3. Residual vein obstruction post DVT has been reported to be
linked to impaired fibrinolysis and disturbed m icrocirculation4–7. The exact mechanism underlying PTS is poorly
understood. PTS results at least in part from delayed venous thrombus resolution and induction of vein wall
fibrosis, which promotes valvular r eflux8. Robust evidence indicates that PTS is closely associated with enhanced
systemic i nflammation3.
Fibrin formation is the final stage of blood coagulation. Fibrin clot structure is highly heterogeneous and
determined by several genetic and environmental factors, with a commonly observed prothrombotic phenotype
involving the formation of denser fibrin networks which are relatively resistant to lysis9. Such altered fibrin
clot properties have been observed in unprovoked venous thromboembolism (VTE)9. The prothrombotic clot
phenotype has also been reported to increase risk of recurrent D VT10. In 2016 Siudut et al. found that lowered
fibrin clot permeability and impaired lysis assessed off anticoagulation following a few months since the first
DVT predispose patients to develop PTS11.
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), an abundant plasma protein synthesized by the liver, has a host of proper-
ties including anti-inflammatory effects, along with both anticoagulant and antifibrinolytic a ctivity12,13. HRG lev-
els decrease during s epsis13, as well as in patients with advanced c ancer14,15. The role of HRG in blood coagulation
1Krakow Centre for Medical Research and Technologies, John Paul II Hospital, Krakow, Poland. 2Institute of
Cardiology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 80 Pradnicka St, 31-202 Krakow, Poland. 3Department of
Clinical Neurological Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. 4KCRI, Krakow, Poland. 5These
authors contributed equally: Jakub Siudut and Joanna Natorska. *email: mmundas@cyf-kr.edu.pl
Scientific RepoRtS | (2020) 10:14419 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71437-5 1
Vol.:(0123456789)
--- Page 2 ---
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 1. A flow-chart representing patient enrollment and long-term observation.
in humans remains unclear. HRG is known to bind heparan sulfate, tropomyosin, and heme16. HRG may limit
antithrombin activity by binding heparin at the N-terminal heparin binding site, due to a high degree of sequence
homology between HRG and a ntithrombin17. In addition, in vitro studies showed that HRG effectively binds 50%
of circulating plasminogen16. It is unclear whether HRG has any effect on the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin,
however its incorporation into fibrin clots has been shown to lead to formation of thinner fibrin fibres in vitro18.
Mice that lacked HRG expression had higher spontaneous fibrinolytic activity, but also shorter prothrombin time
and bleeding time19. Of note, recent proteomic analyses have confirmed the presence of HRG in human plasma
clots in healthy subjects and VTE patients20.
Data on the association of HRG with VTE are conflicting. Some studies have reported elevated HRG in
patients with VTE21,22, while others found that HRG deficiency is a risk factor for VTE23,24. To our knowledge,
there have been no reports exploring HRG in patients with PTS. Based on available data, we hypothesized that
elevated HRG may contribute to long-term sequelae of DVT in part through prothrombotic alterations to fibrin
characteristics.
patients and methods
Baseline characteristics. We screened 243 Caucasian patients aged between 18 to 70 years with a history
of first-ever DVT between October 2008 and June 2010. The patients represented a subgroup of the original
cohort of patients with VTE described p reviously11. Of the 243 individuals with DVT, we excluded 46 patients.
The exclusion criteria were: deficiency of antithrombin, protein C or protein S, antiphospholipid syndrome,
acute coronary syndrome or ischaemic stroke within the previous 3 months, known malignancy, any inflamma-
tory states (C-reactive protein [CRP] > 15 mg/L), diabetes, advanced chronic renal disease, international nor-
malized ratio (INR) more than 1.2, all the states reportedly associated with abnormal plasma clot p roperties9.
Furthermore, we excluded 15 patients in whom baseline plasma samples to measure HRG levels were not avail-
able. Overall, 182 individuals were included in our final analysis.
DVT was diagnosed with duplex sonography (presence of an intraluminal thrombus in the calf, popliteal,
femoral or iliac veins) and proximal DVT was diagnosed if the thrombus was detected in the popliteal veins
(including trifurcation), femoral, and iliac veins. The diagnosis of PE was based on the clinical history and com-
puted tomography (CT) angiography. All patients initially were treated with unfractionated or low-molecular-
weight heparins and then with vitamin K antagonists (VKA). Duration of anticoagulation was 3 months or more
(in patients with provoked VTE), or longer (for the patients with unprovoked VTE and/or recurrence of VTE) at
the discretion of treating physicians. VTE was classified as unprovoked if there was no history of cancer, surgery
requiring general anesthesia, major trauma, plaster cast or hospitalization within the last month, or pregnancy/
delivery within the last 3 months. Class II custom-fitted elastic compression stockings or hosiery were prescribed
to patients for a period of 6–24 months.
The research has been compliant with all relevant national and institutional regulations. Experimental pro-
tocols were approved by Jagiellonian University Ethical Committee and all patients gave the informed consent
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
follow‑up. PTS was assessed 12–14 months since the index event using the Villalta s cale2 and was defined
as a score of ≥ 5 on two consecutive visits that were at least 3 months apart. After 24 months all patients had
prespecified assessment of PTS at the clinic. We evaluated symptomatic recurrent DVT or symptomatic PE. In
subjects with signs or symptoms suggestive of recurrent DVT, including enhanced pain, or tenderness, oedema,
and redness, if there was incompressibility of a proximal vein segment previously free from thrombi, or the
finding of a more than 4 mm increase of the vein diameter in a previously non-compressible vein segment as
compared with the last available measurement. Patients suspected for PE underwent spiral computed tomogra-
phy, followed by pulmonary angiography in the case of a high clinical probability of PE despite normal CT scans.
After a median of 53 (IQR 47–56) months patients underwent the final assessment for PTS and symptomatic
recurrent VTE (Fig. 1).
Laboratory investigations. Blood samples were drawn from an antecubital vein with minimal stasis
at 08:00–10:00 off anticoagulation 3–6 months and 24 months since the index event. Patients on VKA were
switched to anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin for 10–14 days and blood was collected ≥ 12 h
Scientific RepoRtS | (2020) 10:14419 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71437-5 2
Vol:.(1234567890)
--- Page 3 ---
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
after the last injection when the INR was less than 1.2. Venous blood samples were centrifuged at 2000 g for
10 min within 30 min of the draw, and the supernatant was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until analysis.
Routine laboratory tests were used to evaluate lipid profile, glucose, and creatinine. Fibrinogen was assessed
using the Clauss assay. High-sensitivity CRP was measured by immunoturbidimetry (Roche Diagnostics GmbH,
Mannheim, Germany). Plasma D-dimer was measured with the Innovance D-dimer assay (Siemens, Marburg,
Germany). We measured HRG antigen (Cusabio Biotech Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China) according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions at baseline and 2 years after the initial HRG measurement. Tissue-type plasminogen activator
(tPA), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) antigens, and plasma-activated thrombin activatable fibrinoly-
sis inhibitor (TAFI) activity (all American Diagnostica, Stamford, CT, USA), together with interleukin (IL)-6
and IL-10 (both Quantikine, R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, Canada) levels were measured using ELISA
kits. Plasminogen and α-antiplasmin activities were measured using chromogenic assays (both Diagnostica
Stago, Asnières, France). Inter- and intra-assay variation coefficients were < 8%. Plasma Factor VIII activity was
determined using a one-stage clotting assay (Siemens). Thrombophilia screening was performed in all patients
as previously described10.
fibrin clot permeability. Fibrin clot permeability was determined using a pressure-driven system25.
Briefly, 20 mmol/L C aCl and 1 U/mL human thrombin (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) were added to 120 µL
2
citrated plasma. After 2 h of incubation in a wet chamber, buffer volume flowing through the gels was meas-
ured. Plasma clot permeability indicating the average pore size within the clot, was calculated using the formula
Q × L × µ/t × A × Δp, where Q is the flow rate; L, length of the fibrin gel; µ, viscosity of the liquid (in poise); A, a
cross-sectional area (in cm2), Δp, a differential pressure (in dyne cm2) and t, time.
clot lysis analysis. Two different methods were used to assess the efficiency of clot lysis. In the first a ssay26,
citrated plasma was mixed with 15 mmol/L CaCl, 0.6 pM human tissue factor (Innovin, Siemens), 12 µmol/L
2
phospholipid vesicles and 60 ng/mL recombinant tPA (Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, Germany). The tur-
bidity was measured at 405 nm at 37 °C. The lag phase of the turbidity curve, which reflects the time required
for initial protofibril formation and maximum absorbance at the plateau phase were assessed11. Clot lysis time
was defined as the time from the midpoint of the clear-to-maximum-turbid transition to the mid-point of the
maximum-turbid-to-clear transition. In the second assay, fibrin clots, formed as above, were perfused with a
Tris buffer containing 0.2 µmol/L rtPA (Boehringer Ingelheim). D-dimer levels were measured every 20 min in
the effluent using an ELISA (American Diagnostica) for 120 min and the maximum rate of increase in D-dimer
levels and maximum levels of D‐dimer released from clots were analysed. All measurements were performed
by technicians blinded to the origin of the samples. Inter- and intra-assay variation coefficients of the measure-
ments were 6–9%.
Statistical analysis. Continuous variables were expressed as mean and standard deviation (SD) or median
and interquartile range (IQR) as appropriate. Categorical variables were presented as numbers and percentages
and compared by the Fisher’s exact test. Normality was assessed by the Shapiro–Wilk test. Equality of variances
was assessed using the Levene’s test. Differences between the groups were compared using the Student’s or the
Welch’s t-test depending on the equality of variances for normally distributed variables. The Mann–Whitney
U-test was used for non-normally distributed variables. The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient or the Pear-
son’s correlation coefficient were used to measure the linear associations between two variables. The Benjamini–
Hochberg procedure was used to control false discovery rate for multiple comparisons. The risk of PTS was
determined by univariate and multivariate models. Variable selection in the multivariate models were performed
using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) using tenfold cross validation to obtain optimal
values for λ27. Two-sided p -values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. All calculations were done with
JMP, Version 9.0.0 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA, 1989–2007).
Results
We included 182 patients at a mean age of 45 years (range 18 to 69 years) to the final analysis (Table 1). The group
comprised 102 men (56%) and 80 women (44%). Fifty-five patients (30.2%) had symptomatic PE combined with
DVT, while the majority experienced DVT alone.
Median Villalta score was 16 (range 6–27).
Median HRG level in the total cohort of DVT patients was 68 (IQR 58–75) µg/mL. The HRG concentration
for the whole cohort correlated with age (r = 0.24, p < 0.001) and glucose (r = 0.16, p = 0.03) and tended to be
positively associated with BMI (p = 0.06) and CRP (p = 0.07). Of note, HRG levels were associated with the blood
types (Supplemental Fig. 1).
Analysis of fibrin clot properties showed that baseline HRG levels correlated with plasma clot permeability
(r = − 0.41, p < 0.001), maximum absorbance (r = 0.24, p = 0.002), and two fibrinolysis measures, i.e. clot lysis
time (r = 0.41, p < 0.001) and maximum rate of increase in D-dimer levels released from clots (r = − 0.16, p = 0.04;
Fig. 2). Moreover, baseline HRG levels showed a positive association with TAFI activity (r = 0.25, p = 0.001), but
not with other fibrinolytic proteins or FVIII.
As many as 48 patients were diagnosed with PTS after 12–14 months of observation, including 10 patients
(20.8%) with mild PTS, 14 with moderate (29.2%), and 24 patients (50%) with Villalta score of ≥ 15 represent-
ing severe PTS. Patients with PTS were older, more frequently obese and had higher plasma glucose (Table 1).
Baseline HRG was 18.6% higher in patients who developed PTS as compared to those who did not (p < 0.001).
In patients with PTS, baseline HRG correlated with the Villalta score (r = 0.45, p = 0.001), but not with CRP.
Severe PTS was associated with 24% and 8% higher HRG levels as compared with mild and moderate forms of
Scientific RepoRtS | (2020) 10:14419 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71437-5 3
Vol.:(0123456789)