
--- Page 1 ---
pubs.acs.org/JACS Article
Investigating Native Metal Ion Binding Sites in Mammalian
Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein
Katrin Ackermann, Siavash Khazaipoul, Joshua L. Wort, Amélie I. S. Sobczak, Hassane El Mkami,
Alan J. Stewart,* and Bela E. Bode*
CiteThis:J.Am.Chem.Soc.2023,145,8064−8072 ReadOnline
ACCESS *
Metrics&More ArticleRecommendations sı SupportingInformation
ABSTRACT: Mammalian histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a
highly versatile and abundant blood plasma glycoprotein with a diverse
range of ligands that is involved in regulating many essential biological
processes, including coagulation, cell adhesion, and angiogenesis.
Despite its biomedical importance, structural information on the
multi-domain protein is sparse, not least due to intrinsically disordered
regionsthateludehigh-resolutionstructuralcharacterization.Bindingof
divalent metal ions, particularly ZnII, to multiple sites within the HRG
protein is of critical functional importance and exerts a regulatory role.
However, characterization of the ZnII binding sites of HRG is a
challenge; their number and composition as well as their affinities and
stoichiometries of binding are currently not fully understood. In this
study, we explored modern electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy methods supported by protein secondary and
tertiary structure prediction to assemble a holistic picture of native HRG and its interaction with metal ions. To the best of our
knowledge,thisisthefirsttimethatthissuiteofEPRtechniqueshasbeenappliedtocountandcharacterizeendogenousmetalion
binding sites in a native mammalian protein of unknown structure.
■
INTRODUCTION microscopy rather challenging, and an HRG fragment
comprising the HRR and parts of both PRRs was predicted
Inthisreport,wederiveaholisticpictureofintrinsicmetalion
to be intrinsically disordered,5 which may explain the lack of
binding sites in a native mammalian plasma protein obtained
available high-resolution X-ray structures for the full-length
from electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy
protein.9,10 In fact, recent availability of AlphaFold2 (AF2)
supported by computational protein structure prediction. No
protein structure prediction11,12 in combination with JPred4
high-resolution experimental structure of the full-length
secondary structure prediction13 based on the full HRG
protein has been reported to date.
sequence strongly supports the idea of high disorder (in the
Mammalian histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a glycosy-
absence of interaction partners) for the PRR1-HRR-PRR2
latedproteinof∼70kDainsizeandispresentinbloodplasma
atrelativelyhighconcentrations(∼1.5μM).1 Ithasnumerous stretch (Figures S1 and S2).
Several functions of HRG have been described to be
bindingpartners, suchas heparin,plasminogen, divalent metal
mediated by ZnII.3,6,7 In the physiological context, free ZnII is
ions, and heme, and is involved in many essential regulatory
cytotoxic at low concentrations; thus, plasma ZnII levels are
biological processes, including blood coagulation, cell migra-
tightly regulated, with the majority of the 15−20 μM ZnII
tion, proliferation and adhesion, tumor growth inhibition and
angiogenesis, as well as immune complex clearance.1−7 HRG present in plasma bound to (mostly) albumin and small
molecules, keeping the free ZnII concentration in the
has therefore been referred to as the “Swiss Army knife of
nanomolar range.1,14 Within the organism, increased ZnII
mammalian plasma”.8
levels can arise following release from activated platelets or
Despite a plethora of functions, there is surprisingly little
damaged cells,15 reaching transient localized ZnII concen-
experimental data relating to the structure of HRG. The
protein exhibits a multi-domain arrangement with two N-
terminal (N1 and N2) and one C-terminal (C) domain and Received: January16,2023
has a central histidine-rich region (HRR) that is flanked by Published: March31,2023
proline-rich regions (PRRs) on either side (Figure 1). While
this domain structure is well established, a high-resolution
structure is only available for one of the two N-terminal
domains (N2).9 The small size of HRG makes cryo-electron
©2023TheAuthors.Publishedby
AmericanChemicalSociety https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c00587
8064 J.Am.Chem.Soc.2023,145,8064−8072
--- Page 2 ---
Journal of the American Chemical Society pubs.acs.org/JACS Article
Different EPR techniques provide access to local structural
information around paramagnetic centers,28−34 nanometer
distances between those centers employing pulse dipolar
EPR spectroscopy (PDS),35−47 and binding constants.48−50
Continuous wave (CW) EPR can be used to characterize the
bindinggeometryaroundtheparamagneticmetalcenterandto
resolve interactions with nearby nuclear spins, including
superhyperfine (SHF) interactions with directly coordinating
nitrogen atoms.51,52 Hyperfine spectroscopy can identify the
orbitals harboring the unpaired electron and their distance to
close-by magnetic nuclei; this is useful to investigate whether
different binding sites are sequentially populated (in contrast
to all sites having similar binding constants). One hyperfine
Figure 1. Domain structure of rabbit HRG showing the disulfide method is ELDOR-detected NMR (EDNMR),53,54 which
bridgingarrangements(graylines,disulfidebondsatpositions6−497,
provides information on magnetic nuclei directly coordinated
60−71,87−108,185−407,199−222,and264−294)andfiveputative to(andthusstronglycoupledto)theparamagneticcenter.53,54
glycosylation sites (predicted asparagine glycosylation sites at
Complementarily, electron spin echo envelope modulation
positions 107, 184, 232, 302, and 477, indicated by purple boxes).
(ESEEM) is sensitive to weakly coupled nuclei and can
Residue numbers are given with respect to the mature protein, i.e.,
therefore help elucidate interactions between paramagnetic
without the N-terminal signal sequence (comprising the N-terminal
eightresiduesbeforecleavage).Theinsetdetailstheprimarystructure centers and more distant nuclear spins.33,55,56 These experi-
of the HRR (amino acid sequence for residues 321−399), with mentsallow,forexample,assessmentofthenumberofremote
tandemrepeats ofthe consensussequence G[H/P][H/P]PH. amino nitrogen atoms attributed to histidine residues present
at metal ion binding sites.57,58 The corresponding hyperfine
trations estimated to be up to 50 μM, allowing binding to sublevel correlation (HYSCORE)56,59 experiment essentially
effector proteins such as HRG.1,14 ZnII binding to HRG was adds a second dimension to the ESEEM experiment, and the
resulting cross-peaks can attribute electron-nuclear couplings
demonstrated to exert a regulatory effect on HRG binding to
othertargetsandligandsbymodifyingrespectiveaffinities.1,9,15
toelectronspincentersandeasedatainterpretation.28,34,60To
complement these hyperfine techniques, PDS experiments,
The large number of histidine residues makes the HRR the
primary suspect for binding the divalent metal ions.1 Early such as the pulsed electron−electron double resonance
method (PELDOR aka DEER), are commonly used to
binding studies reported sites accommodating approximately
10 to 20 divalent metal ions,16,17 and a more recent study determine distances between paramagnetic centers on the
confirmedthebindingof10ZnIIionsusingisothermaltitration nanometer scale.43,61−63 Furthermore, the number of spins or
calorimetry (ITC).3 This number is consistent with approx- paramagnetic centers present per complex is encoded in the
PELDOR modulation depth (Δ),64,65 which is also the basis
imately 12 tandem repeats of the consensus sequence G[H/
for determination of binding constants.48−50
P][H/P]PH present within the HRR in HRG (13 repeats in
rabbit, see Figure 1),18−20 which can function as high-affinity In the present work, we employed EPR toward the
characterization of metal ion binding sites and their local
metal ion binding sites by offering coordination by multiple
histidine residues.1,21,22 However, a detailed understanding of environment in HRG purified from rabbit plasma to enhance
our understanding of the role of metal ions in HRG-regulated
thelocalenvironmentofthemetalionbindingsitesislacking.
biologicalprocesses.WefirstestablishedthatCuIIcanbeused
Currently, mammalian plasma is the main source of pure
as a proxy for ZnII to enable CW and pulse EPR studies
HRG protein. This has allowed only limited systematic
investigation of metal ion binding.3,5,17,23 Furthermore, since employing ITC and binding assays. Importantly, a recent
reportfoundthatHRR-derivedpeptidesnotonlybindCuIIbut
we presently cannot produce natively glycosylated HRG
may influence copper homeostasis,66 indicating the potential
recombinantly to sufficient yield, routine modifications
physiological relevance of CuII binding to HRG. Using a suite
performed with in vitro protein production such as site-
of EPR techniques including CW and hyperfine spectroscopy,
directed mutagenesis and selective or uniform labeling with
we then characterized the local environment and topology of
e.g.,isotopesorspinlabels(seebelow)areoutofreachforthe
time being.10 CuII ions bound to native HRG. PDS measurements were
EPR is an important tool for structural analysis and performed to investigate the global arrangement and potential
characterization of biomacromolecules. In contrast to other preferential order of the CuII binding sites within the HRG
structural biology methods, EPR is not limited by the size, protein. Here, a speciation model for the occupation of high-
shape, or complexity of the system and does not require and low-affinity metal ion binding sites was developed based
protein crystallization. Compared to techniques such as ITC, on PELDOR modulation depths. Together with structure
lessmaterialisrequired,andsamplescanbestoredfrozenand predictions,aholisticpictureofHRGbindingtodivalentmetal
reused. EPR measurements require the presence of para- ionsemergedwithapotentialregulatoryroleinHRGfunction.
■
magnetic species, which can be either endogenous, such as
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
paramagnetic metal centers or cofactors, or deliberately
introduced to the site(s) of interest. The latter is commonly EPR spectroscopy requires the presence of paramagnetic
achieved by incorporating stable nitroxide radicals via site- species in the sample. Binding of diamagnetic ZnII can
specificmutagenesisandsite-directedspinlabeling24orbysite- thereforenotbeexaminedbyEPRdirectly;however,previous
specifically engineering artificial metal ion binding sites.22,25 studiesofHRGorHRG-derivedpeptideshavereportedlyused
Another option is substituting endogenous diamagnetic metal the paramagnetic CuII instead.17,23 To confirm the validity of
ions (e.g., ZnII) with paramagnetic ones (e.g., CuII).26,27 this approach, we demonstrated that ITC yields very similar
8065 https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c00587
J.Am.Chem.Soc.2023,145,8064−8072
--- Page 3 ---
Journal of the American Chemical Society pubs.acs.org/JACS Article
numbers of binding sites and binding affinities in vitro when finalproteinconcentration)andaddingCuIIintherangefrom
comparing paramagnetic CuII (this study, Figure 2A) and 1 to 20 molar equivalents (125 μM to 2.5 mM). Frozen
solution CW EPR spectra were recorded for each sample to
observe the CuII species present (Figures 3A, S3−S5). The
continuous, almost linear increase in the CuII signal from 1 to
20 molar equivalents of CuII (Figure 3B) indicated that the
CuII observed in the spectrum accounted for virtually all CuII
added, excluding potential precipitation or anti-ferromagnetic
interaction that would have resulted in a reduced CuII signal.
Resolved SHF couplings could be assigned to directly
ligating nitrogen atoms. These 14N SHF splittings remained
clearly visible from the initial addition of 1 up to ∼10−12
molar equivalents of CuII (Figure S6). This suggested the
absence of coordinatively distinct metal ion binding sites with
substantially different SHF coupling patterns. Thus, CW EPR
datanicelycomplementedthepresentedITCresults.3,16While
ITC showed the presence of 10−12 high-affinity CuII binding
sitesinHRG,CWEPRdemonstratedthatthefirst10−12CuII
ions were bound to nitrogen ligands. In the context of HRG,
thesesitesaretentativelyassignedtohistidinesidechainsinthe
HRR.
The resolution of 14N SHF coupling gradually decreased
upon addition of CuII, in agreement with earlier data.17 This
caneitherbecausedbyspectralbroadeningbytheinteraction
between CuII ions in close proximity or by a variety of sites
being occupied (butnot merely “dilutingout”theSHF signal,
seeSIformoredetaileddiscussion).Tofurtherinvestigatethe
appearance of additional,lower-affinitymetalion bindingsites
anddeterminethemaximumbindingcapacityofHRG,asetof
samples with high CuII loading (from 50 to 400 molar
equivalents) was assessed (Figure 3C). Here, the protein
concentrationwasvaried(from6.25to50μM),whiletheCuII
concentration was kept constant (at 2.5 mM), yielding a
constantdoubleintegraloftheresultingCWsignal,withinthe
confidence estimate (Figure 3D).
Importantly, while the 50-equivalent CuII sample showed
mainly broadening in the CW spectrum compared to the 5-
equivalent CuII sample, the higher CuII equivalent samples
clearlydemonstratedtheappearanceofadditionalCuIIspecies
Figure 2. (A) ITC data for CuII binding to HRG. The upper panel by stark changes in the spectral lineshapes (Figure 3E).
shows the resultant raw data, and the lower panel shows the fitted Comparing g and A values retrieved from the CW spectra
II II
data. Raw datawerefitted using a “one-set-of-sites”model in Origin (Table S1) to Peisach−Blumberg correlations29 and recent
7.0. From the resultant fit, the number of binding sites N and the
reports on nitrogen (histidine/imidazole)-coordinated
dissociationconstant(K ITC )weredeterminedasN=11.1±0.1sites CuII,28,32 our data suggested multiple CuII coordination
and K = (6.3 ± 0.4) × 10−6, respectively. (B) Effect of ZnII and
ITC modes. Initially, CuII was bound by as many as four nitrogen
CuII on binding of rabbit HRG to immobilized unfractionated
ligands(histidineresidues;Trisbuffer,seetheSIchapter“EPR
heparin.Assayswereperformedintriplicate;errorbarsrepresentthe
SEM.Theresultantdissociationconstants(K )obtainedwere(2.98
samplepreparation”fordiscussion),whilehigherexcessofCuII
D
±0.75)×10−7intheabsenceofmetalions,(2.5±0.5)×10−9inthe ledtocoordinationinvolvingbothnitrogenandoxygenatoms
presenceof50μMZnII,and(2.9±0.5)×10−9inthepresenceof50 (2N2O; 3N1O) as well as the appearance of free CuII (see
μMCuII. spectrum of CuII in water), indicating that the maximum
bindingcapacityofHRGwasexceeded.Thesefindingshavea
diamagnetic (EPR-silent) ZnII.3 Next, a heparin binding assay direct structural impact on HRG as they demonstrated a CuII
confirmed a similar increase in the affinity of HRG binding to concentration-dependent shift in CuII coordination, implying
heparin for both, ZnII and CuII, indicating the exertion of a that induced structural changes in HRG are required for, and
similar functional effect (Figure 2B). Together, ITC and depend on, the metal loading.
heparin binding data suggested that CuII is a promising proxy Thequestionof whetherthegraduallossof SHFresolution
for ZnII for performing EPR spectroscopic studies of the local intheCWspectrawasduetoinhomogeneouslinebroadening
environment of metal ion binding sites and their spatial (while having the same underpinning SHF coupling) was
distribution in HRG. For details on sample preparation and investigated using hyperfine spectroscopy. In the presence of
experimentalprocedures,seeSupplementaryInformation(SI). HRG, EDNMR spectra displayed additional peaks compared
For EPR investigations of HRG, a “pseudo-titration” to CuII in buffer (Figures 4A and S7, Table S2), confirming
series49,64 (each titration point is a discrete sample) was coordinationbyatleasttwoiminonitrogennucleiofimidazole
prepared, keeping the HRG concentration constant (125 μM rings to CuII. These were tentatively assigned to histidine
8066 https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c00587
J.Am.Chem.Soc.2023,145,8064−8072