
--- Page 1 ---
Life Sciences 386 (2026) 124152
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/lifescie
The E3 ubiquitin ligase midline 1 reduces the intrinsic antibacterial activity
of hepatocytes by promoting HRG degradation during sepsis
Junjie Shua,1, Wei Maa,1, Haoru Liua, Haisu Daib, Hao Zhangc, Rui Gaoa, Xue Yanga,
Wanqi Tanga, Yang Huanga, Xiaoyuan Maa, Huaping Lianga,*, Xia Yanga,*
aDepartment of Wound Infection and Drugs, State Key Laboratory of Trauma and Chemical Poisoning, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University (Third Military
Medical University), Chongqing, 400042, PR China
bDepartment of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, 400042, PR China
cDepartment of Critical Care Medicine, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, 400042, PR China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Aims: The ubiquitination system in hepatocytes and its direct role in antibacterial defense during sepsis remain
Hepatocyte poorly understood. This study investigated the mechanism by which the E3 ubiquitin ligase Midline 1 (Mid1)
Mid1 regulates the degradation of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) during bacterial infection, and a proof-of-concept
HRG
approach was proposed to block Mid1 and relieve hepatic sepsis.
Antibacterial capacity
Material and methods: Transcriptomic analysis of livers from a mouse cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model
Sepsis
was used to reveal changes in the global ubiquitination and Mid1 level. Immunoprecipitation, coupled with mass
Ubiquitination
spectrometry, and native PAGE, was used to assess the proteins that bind to Mid1. The therapeutic effects of Mid1
in vivo were evaluated through hepatocyte-specific siRNAs and inhibitors.
Key findings: Mid1 was significantly upregulated in hepatocytes from both CLP mice and patients with acute
infection, accompanied by increased global ubiquitination. Inhibiting Mid1 in hepatocytes enhanced their
antibacterial capacity and reduced infection-induced cellular damage in cellulo and in vivo experiments. Mid1
overexpression increased bacterial survival in AML12 hepatocyte cell lines. Mechanistically, Mid1 physically
directly binds the HRG and targets it for ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation. Crucially, HRG, identified as a novel
Mid1 substrate, is critical for antibacterial defense—blocking HRG abolished the protective effects of Mid1
knockdown. Hepatocyte-specific Mid1 siRNA and DPP4 inhibitors improved systemic outcomes and survival in
septic mice.
Significance: This study highlights that the Mid1-HRG ubiquitination axis is a critical regulator of sepsis pro-
gression, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy to augment the liver's intrinsic antibacterial activity.
Abbreviations IL-1β interleukin-1β
IP immunoprecipitation
AAV adeno-associated virus IRF3 interferon regulatory factor 3
AST aspartate aminotransferase LDH lactate dehydrogenase
CHX cycloheximide LPS lipopolysaccharide
CLP cecal ligation and puncture Mid1 midline-1
CR creatinine MS mass spectrometry
CRP C-reactive protein PI propidium iodide
DPP4 dipeptidyl peptidase-4 PLT platelet
HRG histidine-rich glycoprotein PP2Ac protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit
ICAM-1 intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1 SAA serum amyloid A
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: 13638356728@163.com(H. Liang), oceanyx@tmmu.edu.cn(X. Yang).
1 These authors contributed equally.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2025.124152
Received 27 August 2025; Received in revised form 5 December 2025; Accepted 11 December 2025
Available online 17 December 2025
0024-3205/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
--- Page 2 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
STAT1 signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 function, and enhanced survival in septic mice. In summary, these
TNF-α tumor necrosis factor alpha findings reveal that the Mid1-HRG axis is as a novel regulator of liver
sepsis progression, suggesting a crucial target for sepsis therapies.
1. Introduction
2. Material and methods
Sepsis is now defined as a dysregulated host response to infection,
resulting in life-threatening organ dysfunction. The disease is critical, 2.1. Bacterial strains and culture conditions
and the incidence and mortality rates remain high [1]. Excessive in-
flammatory responses and cytokine storms during sepsis have been The E. coli and MRSA (ATCC 43300) strains were cultured overnight
consistently cited as the main causes of high mortality. However, drugs in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at 37 ◦C with shaking at 200 rpm. The
targeting important inflammatory mediators (e.g., TNF-α, IL-1β, and following morning, they reached the logarithmic growth phase. Bacte-
toll-like receptors) have not yielded satisfactory clinical results in rial growth was monitored by measuring the optical density at 600 nm
improving the survival rates of sepsis patients [2]. Recent studies have (OD600), where an OD600 of 1.0 corresponded to approximately 1 ×
shown that innate immune dysfunction and acquired immunosuppres- 109 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml for E. coli [19] and an OD600 of 0.5
sion jointly contribute to multiorgan injury and sepsis-related mortality; to approximately 1.5 ×108 CFU/ml for MRSA [20]. The bacterial sus-
thus, a strategy for enhancing the immune response has been proposed. pensions were then diluted to the required concentrations for subse-
However, relevant studies lack evidence from large-scale randomized quent in vivo (animal model) and in cellulo (cell model) experiments.
controlled trials (RCTs) and are therefore not included in current sepsis
treatment guidelines [3]. The treatments recommended by guidelines
2.2. Animals
mainly include resuscitation, organ support, early administration of
antibiotics, and control of the infection focus. Nevertheless, specific Male C57BL/6 J mice (6–8 weeks old) were obtained from Charles
treatment methods are still lacking.
River Laboratory (Beijing, China) and housed in a specific pathogen-free
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), a hepatocyte-secreted serum
(SPF) facility at the Animal Experiment Center of the Army Medical
protein, circulates at relatively high concentrations in human serum
Center (Chongqing, China). The mice were maintained under controlled
(100–150 μg/ml) and has been hailed as the “Swiss Army Knife” of conditions (22–25 ◦C, 12-h light/dark cycle) with adequate ventilation
serum proteins owing to its multifunctional properties [4]. During
and free access to food and water. All animal experiments were
sepsis, the serum HRG concentration decreases [5] and is a reliable
approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Army Medical Uni-
biomarker for determining the presence of bacterial infection and the
versity (approval no. AMUWEC20247132) and conducted in compliance
severity of the disease in patients [6]. In the context of infection and
with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
inflammation, HRG has diverse protective effects [7], including pro-
moting macrophage phagocytosis [8], restraining the excessive activa-
2.3. Human liver tissue samples
tion of neutrophils [9], inhibiting the formation of insoluble immune
complexes (IIC) [10], and neutralizing endotoxins [11]. HRG exerts
Healthy human liver tissue samples were obtained from macro-
direct antibacterial effects by disrupting bacterial cell wall integrity in
scopically normal residual tissue of patients undergoing resection for
gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa)
benign liver diseases. Infected liver tissue samples were obtained from
and gram-positive bacteria (Enterococcus faecalis and Staphylococcus
patients diagnosed with acute cholangitis, a condition resulting from the
aureus) [12]. Exogenous HRG supplementation (20 mg/kg) significantly
combination of bacterial infection and biliary obstruction [21]. This
improves survival rates in septic mice [9], highlighting its therapeutic
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Army Medical
potential. Despite these promising findings, large-scale production of
Center (approval no. YYLS2025038). Written informed consent was
medical-grade HRGs remains economically unfeasible, preventing the
clinical translation of “exogenous HRG supplementation therapy” to obtained from all participants in accordance with the principles outlined
in the Declaration of Helsinki. The donors consented to the pseudony-
date. The regulatory mechanisms of HRG in hepatocytes during sepsis
mized use of their tissue samples and clinical data (sex, age, diagnosis)
require further investigation.
for research and publication purposes. No compensation was provided
Mid1, a RING finger family E3 ubiquitin ligase, plays a pivotal role in
for participation.
diverse disease processes. It is involved in multiple contexts, including
asthma (in bronchial epithelial cells) [13], esophagitis (in the esopha-
geal epithelium) [14], and sepsis-induced lung injury (in postcapillary 2.4. Mouse sepsis and peritonitis models
venous endothelial cells) [15]. In spinal cord injury, the inhibition of
MID1 transcription promotes macrophage M2 polarization, which in Cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model: Following laparotomy, the
turn favors the reconstruction of the neural stem cell microenvironment cecum was exposed, and the fecal contents were concentrated in the
[16]. In multiple sclerosis models, Mid1 promotes effector T cell distal cecum. The cecum was ligated and punctured approximately 1.2
migration to the central nervous system by upregulating the mTOR/ cm from the distal end, allowing a small amount of fecal material to
microtubule pathway [17]. Phosphatase 2Ac (PP2Ac) and interferon extrude before being returned to the abdominal cavity. The incision was
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) serve as substrates for Mid1-mediated ubiq- then sutured.
uitination. Ubiquitin-mediated degradation of IRF3 suppresses type I LPS-induced peritonitis model: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was dis-
interferon (IFN-I) production and impairs antiviral responses [18]. solved in sterile saline and administered intraperitoneally (10 mg/kg).
However, little is known regarding the role of hepatocyte Mid1 in septic After 12 or 24 h, the mice were euthanized, and specimens were
liver injury. collected for further analysis.
In this study, we identified a significant increase in total ubiquiti- Mouse serum was collected and analyzed via an automated
nation levels and Mid1 expression in septic liver tissues. Hepatocyte- biochemical analyzer (Beckman Coulter) to measure the following pa-
specific Mid1 knockdown attenuated hepatocyte damage and rameters. Liver function markers included alanine aminotransferase
enhanced bacterial clearance both in cellulo and in vivo. We now (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TB), lactate
demonstrated for the first time that HRG is a novel substrate of Mid1- dehydrogenase (LDH), and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT). Kidney
mediated ubiquitination. Therapeutically, hepatocyte-targeted Mid1 function marker: Creatinine (Crea). Hematological parameter: Platelet
siRNA and an oral DPP4 inhibitor effectively suppressed hepatic Mid1 count (PLT). HRG levels were quantified by immunoblotting and ELISA
expression. This intervention elevated serum HRG levels, improved liver (RayBiotech, Cat#Q9ESB3).
2
--- Page 3 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
2.5. Histopathological analysis hepatocytes, Kupffer macrophages, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells
(LSECs), and hepatic stellate cells (JS1). The cells were treated with or
Mouse liver samples were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde, dehy- without E. coli (MOI of 10:1), LPS (1 μg/ml; Sigma, Cat#L5293), TAK-
drated, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned. For morphological 243 (1 μM; MCE, Cat#HY-100487), CHX (10 μg/ml; MCE, Cat#HY-
assessment, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed. 12320), or MG132 (10 μM; MCE, Cat#HY-13259). Notably, antibiotics
Immunohistochemistry was performed using a two-step universal kit were excluded from the medium during the bacterial challenge experi-
(ZSGB-BIO, Cat#PV-8000). Briefly, the sections were dewaxed, rehy- ments. After treatment, the cells were harvested for RT-qPCR and
drated, and treated with PBST (PBS containing 0.1 % Triton X-100) for Immunoblot analysis.
10 min, followed by antigen retrieval. Endogenous peroxidase activity
was blocked by incubating the sections with a peroxidase inhibitor at 2.9. Heparin-bacterial competition assay for HRG binding
room temperature (RT) for 10 min. An anti-Mid1 (Abclonal,
Cat#A7291) antibody was applied, and the samples were incubated The method employed for the heparin-bacterial competition assay to
overnight at 4 ◦C. After washing with PBS, an enzyme-linked sheep anti- evaluate HRG binding was adapted from the literature [23]. In sum-
mouse/rabbit IgG polymer was added, and the mixture was incubated at mary, AML12 cells (2 ×10^6) were cultured in antibiotic-free medium
37 ◦C for 20 min. After another PBS wash, the sections were developed for 12 h and subsequently infected with E. coli (1.5 ×10^8 CFU) per well.
with DAB chromogen, counterstained with hematoxylin, and differen- Heparin (0, 10, 100, 200 and 400 μg/ml) was then added to each well
tiated until the nuclei appeared blue. Finally, the sections were dehy- and incubated at 37 ◦C for 2 h. Following incubation, the cells were
drated, cleared, and mounted for microscopic analysis. centrifuged at 300 ×g for 5 min, and the supernatants were collected.
For immunofluorescence staining, endogenous peroxidases were These supernatants were utilized directly for soluble protein analysis,
blocked as described for IHC. The following primary antibodies were while the cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer. Equal volumes of each
used: anti-Mid1 rabbit antibody (ABclonal, Cat#A7291), anti-CD3 rab- supernatant along with equivalent amounts of proteins from the pellet
bit antibody (Abcam, Cat#ab16669), anti-CD15 rabbit antibody samples were subjected to immunoblotting analysis.
(Abcam, ab15377), anti-CD68 rabbit antibody (Abcam,
Cat#ab125212), and anti-HRG mouse antibody (Santa Cruz, Cat#sc- 2.10. Immunoprecipitation
398,239). The sections were incubated overnight at 4 ◦C with primary
antibodies, washed with PBS, and then incubated with the following Cultured cells were lysed on ice for 10 min in RIPA buffer supple-
secondary antibodies: Alexa Fluor 488-labelled anti-mouse IgG (Thermo mented with protease inhibitors, after which the lysate was centrifuged.
Fisher, Cat#A-21202) or Alexa Fluor 647-labelled anti-rabbit IgG The total protein in the supernatant was collected, quantified and
(Thermo Fisher, Cat#A-21245). After 2 h at RT, the nuclei were stained incubated with an anti-Mid1 antibody (Thermo Scientific, Cat#
with DAPI (5 min, RT). The sections were washed, mounted with an anti- PA5–36305 and Abclonal, Cat# A7291), an anti-ubiquitin antibody
fade medium, and coverslipped. The fluorescence signals were detected (Santa Cruz, Cat# sc-8017), and the corresponding isotype IgG (CST,
via an OLYMPUS superresolution microscope system. Cat# 3900). A Pierce Coimmunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Scientific,
Cat# 88828) was used according to the manufacturer's protocol, fol-
2.6. Isolation of primary hepatocytes lowed by immunoblot analysis.
Primary hepatocytes were isolated using an established protocol 2.11. Native PAGE protocol
[22]. Briefly, the liver tissue was digested to create a hepatocyte sus-
pension, which was then filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer. The The cell samples were collected and lysed with a non-denaturing lysis
filtrate was centrifuged at 50 ×g for 2 min at 4 ◦C to pellet the hepato- buffer (Sangon Biotech, Cat# C51001). The lysate was centrifuged to
cytes. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in the appropriate me- pellet the cellular debris, and the supernatant was mixed with native
dium for subsequent experiments. PAGE protein loading buffer (Beyotime, Cat# P0016) to prepare the
samples. An 8 % SDS-free acrylamide gel was used for separation.
2.7. Cell culture and transfection Electrophoresis was performed at a low temperature using Tris-Glycine
electrophoresis buffer (pH 8.8), followed by immunoblot analysis. In
The following cell lines were cultured under standard conditions parallel, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Beyotime,
(37 ◦C, 5 %CO2, humidified atmosphere): AML12 (Alpha mouse liver 12; Cat# P0003) to visualize the protein bands.
Procell Life Science Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China) in AML12-
specific medium, Kupffer macrophages in RPMI-1640 medium, and 2.12. Immunoblot analysis
liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) and hepatic stellate cells (JS1)
in DMEM-H medium. All culture media were supplemented with 10 % Tissue samples and cultured cells (particularly diluted mouse serum
fetal bovine serum and 100 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin. and cultured supernatant for HRG analysis) were lysed via RIPA buffer
AML12 cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors for delivery via (CST, #9806) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors
gene-editing systems. Murine Mid1 knockdown: Cells were transduced (CST, Cat#5872). The lysates were centrifuged for clarification, and the
with a siRNA-containing lentivirus (target sequence: GACCGATGAC- supernatants were collected for immunoblotting. Equal amounts of total
CAGTTAATCTGTGTTTTTT) constructed by Beijing Qingke Biotech- protein were loaded onto Tris-glycine extended stain-free poly-
nology Co., Ltd. Murine Mid1 overexpression: Mid1 transcript variant 3 acrylamide gels. Electrophoresis was performed to separate the proteins
sequence from NCBI GenBank (NM_001290504.1) was cloned and under denaturing conditions. Total protein, measured using a ChemiDoc
inserted into lentiviral vector particles (GenePharma Technology Co., Touch Imaging System (Bio-Rad), serve as a stain-free loading control
Ltd.). The cells were transduced with a Mid1-overexpressing lentivirus. for normalization. After the proteins were transferred to a PVDF or
The optimal multiplicity of infection (MOI) was determined through nitrocellulose membrane, the membrane was blocked to prevent
preliminary screening. Stable cell lines were established according to the nonspecific binding of antibodies binding prior to immunoblotting. The
manufacturers' protocols and subsequently validated. PVDF membranes were incubated with the following primary anti-
bodies: (HRG (ABclonal, Cat# A8431), Mid1 (Thermo Scientific, Cat#
2.8. In cellulo model PA5–36305), Capza1 (ABclonal, Cat# A3776), PP2Acα (Santa Cruz,
Cat# sc-80,665), total ubiquitination (PTMBIO, Cat# PTM-5798),
An in cellulo coculture system was established using AML12 ubiquitin (ABclonal, Cat# A19686), GAPDH (CST, Cat# 5174), β-actin
3
--- Page 4 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
(CST, Cat# 4967), Albumin (ABclonal, Cat# A24161), and HNF4α Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform (Illumina, USA) with a PE150 read
(Bioyuntime, Cat# AF7122). Then, secondary antibodies and chemilu- length following the manufacturer's standard protocol. Low-quality
minescent detection protocols were used as previously described. reads, adapter-contaminated reads, and reads with >10 % unknown
Immunoreactive protein bands were visualized via the ChemiDoc Touch bases were filtered out to obtain clean reads. Clean reads were mapped
System (Bio-Rad, USA). to the mouse reference genome (GRCm39) via HISAT2 (v2.2.1), and
gene expression levels were quantified as FPKM values. DEGs between
2.13. RT-qPCR groups were identified via DESeq2 (v1.34.0) with the following cutoffs:
log2(fold change) > 2 and adjusted p value <0.05. The functional
Total RNA was extracted from the samples using TRIzol reagent, annotation of the DEGs was performed via Gene Ontology (GO)
following the manufacturer's protocol. Complementary DNA (cDNA) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
was synthesized via the HiScript II One-Step RT-PCR Kit (Vazyme, Cat# (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis, with significance defined as an
RR014BP611). Gene expression was analyzed via quantitative PCR adjusted p value <0.05. The results were visualized via ggplot2 (v3.4.4)
(qPCR) with ChamQ SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Cat#Q321) on a in R software (v4.2.3).
CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR System (Bio-Rad). GAPDH served as the
internal control, and relative gene expression levels were calculated via 2.18. Immunoprecipitation coupled mass spectrometry (IP-MS) analysis
the 2 (cid:0) ΔΔCt method. The mRNA expression of the target gene was
compared to that of the control group, following previously established The IP protocol is described in section 2.10. The eluted proteins were
protocols. reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 20 mM iodoaceta-
The sequences of primers used were as follows: mide, and digested with trypsin at 37 ◦C overnight. Tryptic peptides
mMid1F: CCAGGTCCTAATTCCCGAAATCA; were analyzed via a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled with an
mMid1R: GGGTTGGGAGCTGTTAGGTAATC. Easy-nLC 1200 ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography system.
mGAPDH F: CAGTGGCAAAGTGGAGATTGTTG; The MS1 scan range was 350–1800 m/z; MS2 scans were performed with
mGAPDH R: TCGCTCCTGGAAGATGGTGAT. higher-energy collisional dissociation. Peptide and protein identification
hMID1F: CTGACCTGCCCTATTTGTCTG; was performed via MaxQuant (v1.6) against the UniProt mouse protein
hMID1R: GCACAGTGTGATACTAGGATGC. database. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein iden-
tification was set to <1 %. For protein quantification, the label-free
2.14. Flow cytometry quantification (LFQ) intensity was used, and interacting proteins of
Mid1 were screened with the following cutoff: LFQ intensity ratio >2
A PE Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit with 7-AAD (BioLegend, and p value <0.05.
Cat# 640934) was used to identify apoptotic and necrotic cells. After 12
h of coculture with E. coli, the cells were collected and stained according 2.19. GalNAc-siMid1
to the manufacturer's protocol, followed by incubation in the dark at
room temperature. The stained cells were then analyzed via an ACEA GalNAc-siMid1 was designed on the basis of Mid1 mRNA (GenBank:
NovoCyte™ flow cytometer, and the data were processed with FlowJo NM_001290504.1). Sense sequences: 5’-GUAAUCUCACCAAUCUUAU-
V10.3 software. 3′; antisense sequences: 5’-AUAAGA UUGGUGAGAUUACUC-3′. siRNA
strands were chemically synthesized by GenePharma (Shanghai, China)
2.15. Viral vector construction, siRNA preparation and administration with 2’-O-methyl modification at the 3′-terminal nucleotides for
nuclease resistance. Duplexes were purified by HPLC, and their integrity
An adenoviral vector was constructed via the GV698 promoter. The was verified via 15 % urea-PAGE. GalNAc was conjugated to the 3′-end
sequence for Mid1 was: GACCGATGACCAGTTAATCTGTGTTTTTT. For of the siRNA sense strand via a 6‑carbon spacer phosphorothioate (PS)
in vivo delivery, 100 μl of adeno-associated virus (AAV; 2 ×1012 viral linker, enabling binding to the hepatocyte asialoglycoprotein receptor
particles/ml) was administered intravenously, with AAV-NC serving as (ASGPR).
the negative control. The infection model was successfully established
three weeks after injection. 2.20. Statistical analysis
The following Cy3-labelled siRNAs were synthesized by GenePharma
Technology Co. (Shanghai, China): Mid1-targeting siRNA (mid1-siRNA; Statistical analyses were performed using two-tailed unpaired Stu-
antisense: 5′-AUAAGAUUGGUGAGAUUACUC-3′); scrambled control dent's t-tests or one-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test,
siRNA (siN. C; antisense: 5′-ACGUGACACGUUCGGAGAATT-3′). siRNAs based on the data distribution and experimental design. Specific statis-
were administered intravenously (60 μg per 20 g body weight) 12 h prior tical tests for each dataset are detailed in the corresponding figure leg-
to CLP induction. ends. The experiments were repeated at least three times. Data
processing was performed via GraphPad Prism 9.1 and SPSS 25.0 for
2.16. Bacterial viability analysis analysis and visualization. A *p* < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
To assess bacterial viability, the cells were cultured in media without
antibiotics and infected with MRSA or E. coli at a multiplicity of infection 3. Results
(MOI) of 2 for 18 h. Bacterial viability was then evaluated via the LIVE/
DEAD Bacterial Viability Kit (Invitrogen, Cat# L7012), following the 3.1. E3 ubiquitin ligase Mid1 in the liver is elevated in both a mouse
manufacturer's protocol (live bacteria: green fluorescence; dead bacte- model of sepsis and infected patients
ria: red fluorescence). The fluorescence signals were visualized and
quantified via an Olympus superresolution microscope system. To investigate changes in ubiquitination in the livers of septic mice,
we first assessed global ubiquitination levels. We found that livers from
2.17. Transcriptomic analyses cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) mice exhibited significantly greater
ubiquitination than did those from sham controls (Fig. 1A). The intra-
Total RNA was extracted from the livers of CLP (n =5), Sham (n =3), venous administration of the ubiquitination inhibitor TAK-243
CLP_NC (n = 3), and CLP_shMid1 (n = 3) mice for CLP vs Sham and decreased total ubiquitination by immunoblotting (Fig. 1B, S1A) and
CLP_NC vs CLP_shMid1 analysis. RNA sequencing was performed on the reduced the mRNA expression levels of the inflammatory factors TNF-α,
4
--- Page 5 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
IL-1β and Tnfaip3 (TNFα-induced protein 3) according to RT-qPCR enhance Mid1 stability, thereby driving its accumulation independent of
(Fig. S1B) in the livers of CLP mice but did not alleviate liver injury its transcriptional regulation. These data suggest that Mid1 upregulation
(Fig. S1C) or improve survival rates (Fig. 1C). To determine whether a upon stimulation is achieved through a combination of transcriptional
specific ubiquitin ligase plays a dominant role, we performed tran- induction and potential protein stabilization. Supernatants from shMid1
scriptomic analysis of CLP and sham mouse livers. A total of 393 DEGs cells collected 12 h post-infection (E. coli or MRSA) yielded significantly
were enriched in inflammatory response, immune regulation, and he- fewer bacterial colonies than shNC controls did in plating assays,
patocyte function pathways (Fig. 1D; Fig. S1D, E). Focusing on E3 whereas Lv-Mid1 supernatants produced more colonies (Fig. 3D, E).
ubiquitin ligases from the UBIBROWSER database, we identified three Consistent with these findings, live/dead bacterial staining revealed
candidate E3 ubiquitin ligases (mid1, Pdzrn3, and Rnf180) (Fig. S1F). fewer live bacteria and a higher dead-to-live bacteria ratio in shMid1
The heatmap shows DEGs of genes of partially interested in the livers of supernatants but a lower ratio in the Lv-Mid1 groups (Fig. 3F, G). These
the Sham and CLP groups (Fig. 1E). A chord diagram showing the results demonstrated that Mid1 suppression bolsters the antibacterial
functional enrichment of these DEGs is shown in Fig. 1F. These results capacity of hepatocytes. Consistent with these findings, shMid1 AML12
suggested that Mid1 presented the highest expression and pathway hepatocytes presented fewer bacteria, but Mid1 overexpression (Lv-
enrichment. Consistently, mid1 mRNA and protein (Fig. 1G-H) expres- Mid1) AML12 hepatocytes presented more bacteria after incubation
sion levels in the liver were elevated in both the LPS-induced sepsis with E. coli for 24 h, according to microscopy images (Fig. 3H) and
model and the CLP-induced sepsis model. Moreover, liver samples from bacterial growth curve analysis (Fig. 3I). Trypan blue staining revealed
patients with acute cholangitis also presented increased MID1 mRNA significantly fewer dead cells in the shMid1 groups than in the control or
(Fig. 1I) and protein expression (Fig. 1J-K, S1G). These findings suggest Lv-mid1 groups post-infection (Fig. 3H, J). Flow cytometry (annexin V-
that mid1 may play a critical role in infection-related liver pathology. PE/7-AAD) confirmed these results (Fig. 3K). These results indicate that
Mid1 inhibition decreases the number of bacterial colonies and miti-
3.2. Mid1 expression is predominantly elevated in hepatocytes from septic gates infection-induced hepatocyte damage in cells.
liver tissue
3.4. Hepatocyte-specific Mid1 knockdown improves organ status and
Although hepatocytes constitute the majority of liver cells, we sought survival in septic mice
to specifically determine whether Mid1 upregulation during sepsis oc-
curs primarily in these cells. To investigate this, we isolated hepatocytes To investigate the role of Mid1 in sepsis, we performed in vivo ex-
from CLP mice via gradient centrifugation, and separated them into periments using a liver-targeted adeno-associated virus (AAV) to
hepatocyte and nonhepatocyte fractions (Fig. 2A). Successful separation construct a hepatocyte-specific Mid1 knockdown mouse model (Mid1-
was confirmed by analyzing hepatocyte-specific and inflammatory hep-KD) (Fig. 4A). RT-qPCR confirmed the knockdown efficiency
markers (Fig. 2B). The Mid1 mRNA and protein (Fig. 2B-C) levels were (Fig. 4B), and fluorescence imaging of multiple organs demonstrated
significantly greater in hepatocytes than in nonhepatocyte cells via AAV-specific liver tropism (Fig. 4C). Compared with the AAV-NC group,
quantitative analysis. We further validated these findings in different the Mid1hep-KD group presented a significantly greater survival rate after
cell lines (not only primary hepatocytes) treated with LPS or infected cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) or intraperitoneal E. coli infection
with E. coli for 12 h, including hepatocytes (AML12), Kupffer cells (Fig. 4D). Additionally, the AST (aspartate aminotransferase), Cr
(macrophages), liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs), and hepatic (creatinine) and LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) activities were signifi-
stellate cells (JS1), and the Mid1 protein (Fig. 2D) and mRNA (Fig. 2E) cantly lower in the Mid1hep-KD group than in the control group, but the
expression levels were predominantly elevated in hepatocytes. Primary number of PLTs (platelets) was significantly greater (Fig. 4E, Fig. S2B).
hepatocytes were isolated from wild-type C57BL/6 J mice via in situ Blood PLTs are key mediators of inflammation and infection [24]. These
perfusion (Fig. S2A) and, after 24 h of culture, were treated with LPS or results suggested that Mid1 blockade alleviated liver and kidney injury
infected with E. coli for 12 h. Subsequent analyses revealed a differential induced by CLP. Notably, bacterial loads in major organs were markedly
response. While E. coli infection robustly increased both Mid1 mRNA reduced in Mid1hep-KD mice (Fig. 4F, G).
(Fig. 2F) and protein levels (Fig. 2G-I); LPS stimulation resulted in only a Histopathological analysis of liver tissue revealed extensive immune
marginal upregulation compared to the control. This disparity is likely cell infiltration in both the Mid1hep-KD and AAV-NC groups after CLP or
attributable to the distinct signaling mechanisms engaged by purified E. coli challenge. However, compared with control mice, Mid1hep-KD
LPS (primarily via TLR4) versus whole E. coli, which activates a broader group mice presented significantly smaller areas of hepatocyte degen-
repertoire of pattern recognition receptors. Collectively, these results eration and necrosis (orange arrows) and less immune cell infiltrates
demonstrate that Mid1 is upregulated in hepatocytes during bacterial (green arrows) in H&E-stained liver sections (Fig. 4H) and a lower his-
infection, with a notably stronger induction by whole bacteria than by tological activity index (Fig. 4I). We further assessed inflammatory re-
LPS alone. sponses in peritoneal macrophages. The mRNA expression levels of
proinflammatory factors (TNFα, IL-1β and TGFβ) and the key tran-
3.3. Mid1 inhibition enhances hepatocyte antibacterial activity and scription factor STAT1 were significantly decreased after CLP. However,
reduces the degree of cellular damage induced by infection the mRNA expression level of CD206, a marker of anti-inflammatory M2
macrophages, was lower in the Mid1hep-KD group than in the AAV-NC
To investigate the role of Mid1 in hepatocytes during infection, we group, suggesting a greater risk of cytokine storm in the AAV-NC
generated murine Mid1-knockdown (shMid1) and Mid1-overexpressing group (Fig. S2C). In summary, hepatocyte-specific Mid1 knockdown
(Lv-Mid1) AML12 hepatocyte cell lines, the efficiency of which was improves organ function, reduces bacterial dissemination, and enhances
confirmed via RT-qPCR (Fig. 3A) and immunoblot analysis (Fig. 3B, C). survival in septic mice, potentially by mitigating excessive
Notably, under unstimulated conditions with low basal Mid1 expression, inflammation.
shRNA-mediated knockdown only slightly reduced Mid1 protein levels.
In contrast, upon stimulation, the shRNA directly abrogated the robust, 3.5. HRG is a substrate of Mid1-mediated ubiquitination
inducible synthesis of Mid1, resulting in a far more pronounced reduc-
tion in Mid1 abundance (Fig. 3B). Correspondingly, Lv-Mid1 cells To further explore the mechanism of Mid1 function, we performed
exhibited further elevation of Mid1 protein levels following stimulation immunoprecipitation (IP) using an anti-Mid1 antibody in liver lysates
with LPS or E. coli (Fig. 3C). These observations led us to hypothesize from CLP and sham mice, followed by mass spectrometry analysis (IP-
that LPS or E. coli signaling either inhibits a pathway responsible for MS) to identify Mid1-binding proteins, particularly those that were
Mid1 degradation or promotes post-translational modifications that differentially expressed between the two groups. The results revealed
5
--- Page 6 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
Fig. 1. The level of Mid1 in the liver, which is associated with inflammation, was significantly elevated. (A) Immunoblot analysis of overall ubiquitination levels in
the livers of mice 12 h after CLP; Sham surgery was used as a control. The results of the immunoblot analysis of 3 biological replicates are shown alongside (mean
with SEM, *p <0.05, paired Student's t-test). (B) Immunoblot analysis of the overall ubiquitination level in livers from mice after 20 mg/kg TAk-243 or vehicle
treatment (t.v.i.) 24 h before CLP. The results of the immunoblot analysis of 3 biological replicates are shown alongside (mean with SEM, *p <0.05, one-way
ANOVA). (C) Survival of CLP mice after Tak-243 treatment (t.v.i.) for 24 h. Survival data are shown as Kaplan–Meier curves. (D) Volcano map of differentially
expressed genes in the livers of CLP and control mice. Some of the top 50 genes (including Mid1) are shown. (E) Heatmap of differential gene expression in livers from
CLP and control mice. (F) Chord diagram showing the functional enrichment of the 393 DEGs. The intensity of the red and blue squares represents the magnitude of
the difference between them. (G) Immunoblot analysis of Mid1 in the liver 12 h after intraperitoneal injection of LPS or CLP. Quantification of the results from 3
biological replicates is shown (mean with SEM, *p <0.05, **p <0.01; one-way ANOVA). (H) RT-qPCR of Mid1 in the liver 12 h after the intraperitoneal injection of
LPS or CLP (****p <0.0001, one-way ANOVA). (I) RT-qPCR analysis of Mid1 mRNA levels in healthy and cholangitis liver samples from patients (**p <0.01,
unpaired Student's t-test). (J) Hematoxylin-eosin staining (left) and immunohistochemistry of Mid1 (right) in livers from mice and humans. (K) H-scores of Mid1-
positive hepatocytes in mice and humans from (J) (mean with SD, **p <0.01, Mann-Whitney test).
6
--- Page 7 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
Fig. 2. Mid1 upregulation in the septic liver occurs predominantly in hepatocytes. (A) Experimental workflow for hepatocyte/nonhepatocyte separation via gradient
centrifugation. (B) Immunoblot analysis of the protein levels of ALB, HNF4α, and Mid1 in the hepatocyte and nonhepatocyte fractions at 12 h and 24 h post-CLP. The
results of the immunoblot analysis of 3 biological replicates are shown alongside (mean with SEM, **p <0.01, paired Student's t-test). (C) RT-qPCR analysis of Mid1
mRNA levels in hepatocyte and nonhepatocyte fractions at 12 h and 24 h post-CLP. (D) Immunoblot analysis of Mid1 protein expression in different liver cell lines
(AML12 hepatocytes, JS1 stellate cells, Kupffer macrophages, and LSECs) following LPS treatment or E. coli infection. The results of the immunoblot analysis of 3
biological replicates are shown alongside (mean with SEM, **p <0.01, one-way ANOVA). (E) RT-qPCR analysis of Mid1 mRNA expression in liver cell lines after LPS
treatment or E. coli infection for 12 h (*p <0.05, **p <0.01, ***p <0.001, ****p <0.0001; one-way ANOVA). (F) Mid1 mRNA expression in primary mouse
hepatocytes after LPS treatment or E. coli infection for 12 h, as determined by RT-qPCR (**p <0.01, ****p <0.0001, one-way ANOVA). (G) Immunoblot analysis of
Mid1 protein levels in primary mouse hepatocytes after LPS treatment or E. coli infection for 12 h. Quantification of 3 biological replicates is shown (mean with SD,
***p <0.001, one-way ANOVA). (H) Mid1 expression in primary mouse hepatocytes after LPS treatment or E. coli infection for 12 h, as determined by immuno-
fluorescence. (I) Statistical analysis of the intensity of Mid1 staining in (H) (means with SDs, *p <0.05; one-way ANOVA).
7
--- Page 8 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
Fig. 3. Mid1 regulates antibacterial capacity and resistance to infection in hepatocytes. (A) RT-qPCR analysis of relative Mid1 mRNA levels in shMid1 and Lv-Mid1
cell lines compared with their respective controls (*p <0.05, ***p <0.001, unpaired Student's t-test). (B–C) Immunoblot analysis of Mid1 protein expression in
shMid1 and Lv-Mid1 cell lines following LPS treatment or E. coli infection for 12 h. Quantification of 3 biological replicates is shown (means with SDs, multiple paired
t-tests). (D) Representative images of bacterial colonies in cell supernatants collected 12 h post-infection (E. coli or MRSA). (E) Quantification of colony-forming units
(CFUs) from (D). The connected dots indicate paired experimental replicates (*p <0.05, paired Student's t-test). (F) Live/dead bacterial staining (confocal micro-
scopy) of supernatants 12 h post-infection. Green: viable bacteria (SYTO9); red: dead bacteria (propidium iodide). (G) Quantification of bacterial viability from (F) (n
=3 fields per group; **p <0.01, ***p <0.001, chi-square test). (H) Phase-contrast microscopy and trypan blue staining of AML12 hepatocytes 24 h post-E. coli
infection. (I) Bacterial growth kinetics in cell lines with differential Mid1 expression. (J) Trypan blue-positive cell counts from H (n =6 fields per group; ***p <
0.001, chi-square test). (K) Apoptosis/necrosis analysis by flow cytometry (annexin V-PE vs. 7-AAD). Quadrant II: dead cells.
that the capping protein Capza1, antimicrobial protein HRG, and other determine whether Mid1 interacts with HRG, native PAGE, immuno-
molecules were potential Mid1 interacting proteins (Table 1). Tran- blotting and coimmunoprecipitation analyses were applied. Native
scriptome differential analysis of livers from Mid1hep-KD and NC mice 12 PAGE permits high-resolution separation of multiprotein complexes
h after CLP was performed. According to the GO/KEGG pathway under native conditions to illustrate protein-protein interaction [25].
enrichment results, the response to lipopolysaccharide, response to Mid1 (Fig. 5C left) and HRG (Fig. 5C middle) were visualized almost
chemokines, positive regulation of cytokine production and heparin exclusively from multiprotein complexes of the same molecular weight
binding were identified (Fig. 5A). The molecular function enrichment of (>310 kDa) by immunoblotting. Blue native PAGE revealed the multi-
the HRG PPI network associated with STING was also enriched in hep- protein complexes of whole cell lysates (Fig. 5C right). While these re-
arin binding, signaling receptor binding and lipoprotein lipase activator sults indicated the presence of protein complexes containing various
activity (Fig. 5B). The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of proteins, likely including Mid1 and HRG, they did not prove a direct
HRGs, the biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC) enrich- interaction between them. To investigate this, we performed co-
ment of the HRG network were shown in Fig. S3a, 3b, and 3c, respec- immunoprecipitation assays, which confirmed that Mid1 interacts
tively. The heparin-binding and response to lipopolysaccharide with HRG (Fig. 5D). Furthermore, immunofluorescence analysis
pathways, both closely associated with HRG function, were significantly demonstrated that Mid1 and HRG colocalized in the liver (Fig. 5E, S4a,
enriched, suggesting a potential link between Mid1 and HRG. To b), and this colocalization exhibited a negative correlation under CLP-
8
--- Page 9 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
induced sepsis-like conditions (Fig. 5F). In addition, hepatocytes 24 h prior to CLP induction (Fig. 7A). Fluorescence imaging of organs 12
exhibited increased ubiquitination levels and elevated Mid1 expression h post-CLP confirmed the liver-specific knockdown efficiency of
in CLP model mice; whereas HRG levels decreased in both hepatocytes GalNAc-siMid1 (Fig. 7B), which was further validated by RT-qPCR
and serum (Fig. 5G). To determine whether Mid1 regulates HRG abun- (Fig. 7C). Compared with CLP control mice, GalNAc-siMid1 mice pre-
dance, we conducted cellulo experiments and showed that Mid1 inhibi- sented significantly lower bacterial loads in multiple organs (Fig. 7D, E)
tion in hepatocytes significantly increased the levels of intracellular and improved serological marker and HRG concentrations (Fig. 7F,
HRG and its secretion into culture supernatants after infection (Fig. 5H). S6A). Immunoblot analysis revealed elevated levels of hepatocyte-
Similarly, in vivo experiments revealed higher serum and liver HRG derived HRGs in both the serum and liver tissue of the GalNAc-siMid1
levels in Mid1hep-KD mice than in NC mice postsepsis induction (Fig. 5I). group (Fig. 7G). Given recent evidence that dipeptidyl peptidase-4
To further investigate the underlying mechanism, we used the protea- (DPP4) knockout suppresses Mid1 expression [26], we evaluated the
some inhibitor MG132 to evaluate whether Mid1 mediates HRG ubiq- therapeutic potential of the oral DPP4 inhibitor linagliptin. In CLP mice,
uitination. Compared with untreated control hepatocytes, AML12 linagliptin administration modestly reduced hepatic Mid1 mRNA levels
shMid1 hepatocytes stimulated with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 compared with saline treatment (Fig. 7H, I). It did not affect glycemic
presented increased intracellular HRG levels and ubiquitin-bound pro- fluctuations, as measured by continuous glucose monitoring (Fig. 7J),
tein content according to immunoblotting (Fig. 5J left). Ubiquitin but increased overall survival (Fig. 7K). These findings demonstrate that
immunoprecipitation assays further demonstrated that HRG-ubiquitin GalNAc-siMid1 may serve as promising therapeutic agents for sepsis by
binding was markedly reduced upon Mid1 knockdown (Fig. 5J right), targeting hepatic Mid1.
confirming that the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mid1 mediates HRG ubiquiti-
nation. The quantification revealed a significant difference (Fig. 5K). 3.8. Discussion
These results suggest that HRG undergoes ubiquitin-dependent degra-
dation following sepsis. Moreover, treatment with the protein synthesis Previous studies have revealed that hepatocytes, the major paren-
inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX) revealed that Mid1 overexpression (Lv- chymal cells in the liver, maintain the homeostasis of inflammation [27]
Mid1) markedly reduced HRG protein levels in AML12 cells, whereas and host–pathogen interactions, such as those involving HIV [28], HBV
Mid1-knockdown (shMid1) had no notable effect (Fig. 5L). Critically, [29], and HCV [30]. However, there is limited evidence suggesting that
the degradation of HRG in Mid1-overexpressing cells treated with CHX hepatocytes can directly combat bacterial infections. This study aimed
was effectively blocked by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Fig. 5L, M, to investigate the role and underlying mechanism of the hepatocyte
S4c), demonstrating that Mid1 promotes HRG degradation via the ubiquitin E3 ligase Mid1 in regulating antibacterial defense during
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In summary, these findings demonstrate sepsis.
that HRG serves as a substrate for Mid1-mediated ubiquitination in Hepatocytes produce various immune-modulating factors, including
hepatocytes. C-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid A (SAA), LPS-binding protein
(LBP), CD14, MD-2, fibrinogen [31], hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
3.6. HRG antagonization attenuates the antibacterial phenotype of [32], and lipocalin-2 (LCN2) [33], to activate the host response to
shMid1 cells control bacterial infections. Additionally, primary mouse hepatocytes
enhance the type I interferon response, whereas HepG2 cells induce a
As shown in Fig. S2C, inflammatory factor expression levels in type III interferon response to defend against Listeria monocytogenes
peritoneal macrophages from Mid1hep-KD mice were altered. To deter- infection. Bacterial infections also alter the expression of genes associ-
mine whether Mid1 knockdown modulates immune cell activity via ated with cholesterol metabolism in HepG2 and Huh7 cells [34]. Studies
HRG, we performed immunofluorescence colocalization of the hepatic in mice have shown that the MyD88 pathway in hepatocytes infected
+ +
HRG with T cells (CD3 ), neutrophils (CD15 ), and macrophages with lethal Ehrlichia triggers CASP11 activation, gasdermin D cleavage,
(CD68 + ) in Mid1hep-KD mice after CLP. The results revealed significant IL-6 production, and inhibition of bacterial proliferation [35]. In addi-
+
interactions between HRG-CD68 macrophages, which were further tion to their immune functions, hepatocytes contribute to metabolic
enhanced in Mid1hep-KD mice. Additionally, CD15 + neutrophil infiltra- adaptation during infections by enhancing gluconeogenesis and fatty
tion in the liver was markedly lower in Mid1hep-KD mice than in control acid β-oxidation, processes closely linked to sepsis prognosis [36,37].
mice (Fig. 6A, B). Mid1 has multiple substrates, including the well- Hepatocytes also engage in cross-talk with other immune cells during
characterized protein PP2Ac, which was also upregulated in hepato- bacterial infections. For example, in turtles infected with Aeromonas
cytes from CLP mice (Fig. 6C) and E. coli-infected shMid1 cells (Fig. 6D). hydrophila, hepatic tissues presented increased numbers of endothelial
To determine the role of HRG in Mid1-mediated antimicrobial effects, and Kupffer cells but reduced numbers of T cells, NK cells, dendritic
we treated E. coli-infected shMid1 cells with 400 μg/ml heparin, a cells, and erythroid cells [38]. Despite these findings, research on
competitive HRG antagonist. Immunoblot analysis revealed that heparin hepatocyte-mediated infection responses remains limited compared
reduced HRG binding to bacteria, resulting in more HRG remaining in with the extensive studies on the anti-inflammatory and immunomod-
the supernatant (Fig. 6E). Bacterial plating assays confirmed that hep- ulatory mechanisms of immune cells [39]. These results suggest that the
arin treatment significantly suppressed the increased antibacterial ac- potential roles of hepatocytes in bacterial infection, underscoring the
tivity of shMid1 cells (Fig. 6F, G, S5A) and increased cell death (Fig. 6H). need for further therapeutic strategies for septic liver injury.
However, CCK-8 cytotoxicity assays (Fig. S5B) and bacterial PI staining Our transcriptomic analysis revealed that mid1 is upregulated in the
(Fig. S5C) also demonstrated that this heparin concentration did not liver during sepsis. Initially, identified as a microtubule-associated
affect cell or bacterial viability. In contrast, clinical heparin doses (1–10 protein, mid1 was linked to Opitz syndrome through genetic muta-
μg/ml) failed to antagonize HRG or reverse the phenotype (Fig. S5D), tions [40]. Subsequent studies have demonstrated its involvement in
underscoring the specificity of the role of HRG. These findings suggest immune regulation, including T-cell migration in atherosclerosis [26]
that hepatocytes regulate antibacterial activity through the Mid1-HRG and effector T-cell trafficking in experimental autoimmune encephalo-
axis. myelitis (EAE) [17]. Some studies have defined Mid1 as a transcription
factor [41]. MID1 binds to ATXN2, ATXN3, and ATXN7 mRNAs to
3.7. Hepatocyte-specific Mid1 siRNA and DPP4 inhibitors improve the promote protein synthesis in a CAG repeat-containing mRNA-dependent
systemic status and survival of CLP mice manner [42]. Our unpublished results suggest that HRG transcription in
hepatocytes from CLP mice is suppressed [9]. However, the role of Mid1
Using the GalNAc-siRNA conjugate delivery platform, we developed in liver-related diseases and infections remains unclear and warrants
a hepatocyte-targeted GalNAc-siMid1 and administered it intravenously further investigation. Only a few studies have identified Mid1 as a
9
--- Page 10 ---
J. Shu et al. L i f e S c i e n c e s 386 (2026) 124152
Fig. 4. Hepatocyte-specific Mid1 knockdown enhances sepsis outcomes. (A) Schematic of the experimental design for generating Mid1hep-KD mice. (B) Relative Mid1
knockdown efficiency in livers from Mid1hep-KD mice 12 h post intraperitoneal injection of E. coli or CLP. (C) Fluorescence imaging (EGFP) of organs from Mid1hep-KD
and negative control (NC) mice. (D) Survival analysis of Mid1hep-KD and NC mice following E. coli challenge or CLP. (E) Serum biochemical marker levels in Mid1hep-
KD and NC mice at 12 h post-infection or CLP. (p <0.05, **p <0.01, **p <0.0001; unpaired Student's t-test or Mann-Whitney U test). (F) Bacterial colony growth
from organ lysates. Whole organs were homogenized, and lysates were plated at high, medium, and low dilutions. (G) Quantification of bacterial colony-forming
units (CFUs). Each dot represents one mouse. (p- values were determined by unpaired Student's t-test or Mann-Whitney U test). (H) H&E-stained liver sections
from infected Mid1hep-KD and NC mice. Degenerated/necrotic hepatocytes (orange arrows) and immune cell infiltrates (green arrows) are indicated. (I) Histological
activity indices (Knodell scores) from (H) (means with SDs, **p <0.01; one-way ANOVA). NC, negative control.
significant factor in the pathogenesis of liver disease. Mid1 is upregu- Additionally, mid1 modulates endothelial cell ICAM-1 expression and
lated in Kupffer cells during hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). neutrophil adhesion in the lungs of septic mice [15].
Inhibition of Mid1 attenuates liver damage by reducing neutrophil Mid1 regulates the innate immune response by ubiquitinating key
infiltration, intrahepatic inflammation, and hepatocyte apoptosis [43]. signaling molecules, including IRF3 [18], IFNAR2 [44], and f NSP9
10