
--- Page 1 ---
Biochemistry 1997, 36, 6653-6662 6653
Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein Binds to Human IgG and C1q and Inhibits the
Formation of Insoluble Immune Complexes
Nick N. Gorgani, Christopher R. Parish, Simon B. Easterbrook Smith, and Joseph G. Altin*
DiVision of Immunology and Cell Biology, The John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National UniVersity,
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
ReceiVed October 14, 1996; ReVised Manuscript ReceiVed March 10, 1997X
ABSTRACT: PurificationofthecomplementcomponentC1qfromhumanserumusinganestablishedmethod
resulted in the copurification of two 30 kDa proteins with an N-terminal sequence identical to human
histidine-richglycoprotein(HRG). Therefore,toexplorethepossibilitythatHRGcaninteractwithC1q,
we examined the ability of 81 kDa (native) and the 30 kDa proteins (presumably proteolytic N-terminal
fragments of HRG) to bind to C1q, using both ELISA and optical biosensor techniques. Both forms of
HRG were found to bind to the human complement component C1q and also to purified human and
rabbit IgG by ELISA. Kinetic analyses of the HRG-C1q and HRG-IgG interactions using the IAsys
biosensorindicatetwodistinctbindingsiteswithaffinitiesK 0.78(cid:2)10-8MandK 3.73(cid:2)10-8Mfor
d1 d2
C1q,andonebindingsitewithaffinityK 8.5(cid:2)10-8MforIgG. Moreover,thefactthatbothnativeand
d
30kDaHRGbindtoC1qandtoIgGsuggeststhattheIgGandC1qbindingregionsonHRGarelocated
in the 30 kDa N-terminal region of the HRG molecule. The Fab region of IgG is likely to be involved
in the HRG-IgG interaction since HRG also bound to F(ab¢) fragments with an affinity similar to that
2
seenwiththecompleteIgGmolecule. Interestingly,thebindingbetweenHRGandIgGwassignificantly
potentiated (K reduced from 85.0 to 18.9 nM) by the presence of physiological concentrations of Zn2+
d
(20 (cid:237)M). Conversely, the presence of Zn2+ weakened the binding of HRG to C1q (K increased from
d
7.80 to 29.3 nM). Modulation of these interactions by other divalent metal cations was less effective
with relative potencies being Zn2+ > Ni2+ > Cu2+. An examination of the effect of native and 30 kDa
HRG on the formation of insoluble immune complexes (IIC) between ovalbumin and polyclonal rabbit
anti-ovalbuminIgGrevealedthatphysiologicalconcentrationsofHRGcanmarkedlyinhibitIICformation
in Vitro. The results show that human HRG binds to C1q and to IgG in a Zn2+-modulated fashion, and
that HRG can regulate the formation of IIC in Vitro, thus indicating a new functional role for HRG in
ViVo.
It is well established that certain autoimmune diseases, both inhibit the formation of IIC and promote their solubi-
suchassystemiclupuserythematosus(SLE)andrheumatoid lization (Anton et al., 1994; Schifferli, 1987; Takata et al.,
arthritis(RA),areassociatedwiththeproductionofautoan- 1984). Incontrast,C1q(aconstituentoftheC1component
tibodies (Mountz et al., 1994). Moreover, in Vitro studies ofcomplement)isreportedtoenhancetheformationofIIC
haveshownthatautoantibodiescanbecross-linkedwiththeir bybindingtoIgGmoleculesviatheC(cid:231)2domain(Burtonet
cognateantigenstoforminsolubleimmunecomplexes(IIC) al.,1980)andmayleadtothecross-linkingofIgGmolecules
(Sittampalam & Wilson, 1984a), which can precipitate in (Geronskietal.,1985;Easterbrook-Smithetal.,1988). The
target tissues (e.g., joint synovial membrane) and lead to a interaction of C1q with the Fc region of IgG molecules in
lack of nutrient transport and consequent tissue injury. immune complexes may also activate the complement
Evidencesuggeststhattheeffectiveclearanceofcirculating cascade by the classical pathway (Schifferli, 1987). In
immune complexes is necessary to limit immune complex- addition, C1q is reported to bind to specific receptors on
mediatedtissueinjury(Charlesworthetal.,1982). Protective normal endothelial cells through its collagen-like fragment
measuresmayincludemechanismswhichinhibitIICforma- and to act as an Fc receptor for circulating IgG immune
tion,aswellasthosewhichpromotesolubilizationofformed complexes (Zhang et al., 1986). In contrast, studies on the
IIC. anti-opsonic effect of serum suggest that C1q inhibits the
EvidencesuggeststhatthecomplementcomponentsC3b interactionbetweenIgGandtheFcreceptorsonneutrophils
andC1qcanmodulatetheformationofIIC,inVitro. Upon (Hakansson et al., 1982).
activation of the complement cascade, the generation of
InordertocomparetheeffectsofrabbitandhumanC1q
complementC3banditscovalentbindingtotheFc(C(cid:231)2or
ontheformationofIICbetweenovalbuminandrabbitanti-
hingedomains)and/orFabportionoftheIgGmoleculemay ovalbumin IgG in Vitro, we recently purified rabbit and
human C1q using an established method. During these
*TowhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedattheDivisionof studies,twoproteinswithanN-terminalsequenceidentical
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Faculty of Science, Aus- to histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) copurified with C1q
tralian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. Phone: (Gorganietal.,unpublishedobservation),suggestingthatC1q
61 (6) 249 4495. FAX: 61 (6) 249 0313. E-mail: Joseph.Altin@
mayformacomplexwiththisprotein. Preliminarydataalso
anu.edu.au.
XAbstractpublishedinAdVanceACSAbstracts,May1,1997. suggestedthatHRGmayassociatewithIgGmolecules.HRG
S0006-2960(96)02573-1 CCC: $14.00 © 1997 American Chemical Society
--- Page 2 ---
6654 Biochemistry, Vol. 36, No. 22, 1997 Gorgani et al.
isa81kDaproteinpresentinhumanplasmaataconcentra- mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.8) containing 1 mM EDTA
tion of 150 (cid:237)g/mL, and was first described by Heimburger and 0.5 M NaCl (loading buffer). The plasma was mixed
et al. (1972). The protein has since been isolated from the with EDTA and NaCl at the indicated final concentrations
plasma of other species such as mouse, rabbit, cattle, and asintheloadingbufferandwith4-(2-aminoethyl)benzene-
chicken. In Vitro studies have implicated HRG in the sulfonylfluoridehydrochloride(AEBSF)at100(cid:237)g/mLand
divalentmetalionbindingcomponentofserum(Guthans& aprotinin(atrypsininhibitor)at2(cid:237)g/mL. Theplasmawas
Morgan,1982),regulationofthecoagulationcascade(Leung passedthroughtheequilibratedcolumn,andunboundprotein
etal.,1984;Leung,1986),regulationofgrowthfactoraction was removed by extensive washing of the column with the
(Brown&Parish,1994),andregulationofimmunefunction loading buffer. Bound HRG was then eluted from the
(Rylatt et al., 1981; Saigo et al., 1990; Chang et al., 1992; columnusingthesamebuffercontaining2MNaCl. Since
Olsenetal.,1996). Itsprecisephysiologicalrole,however, ourresultsindicatedthat30kDaHRGcopurifieswithC1q,
remains to be determined. the C1q purification procedure also was used to purify the
In this study, we used an enzyme-linked immunosorbent N-terminal30kDafragmentofHRG. Rabbitanti-ovalbumin
assay (ELISA) and the IAsys resonant mirror biosensor to IgG was purified from immunized rabbit serum by Na 2 SO 4
study the binding of human HRG to human C1q and IgG, precipitation and ion-exchange chromatography using a
andtodeterminethekineticconstantsfortheseinteractions. DEAE-Sephacel column. The IgG was collected from the
Inaddition,weusedlightscatteringtechniques(Easterbrook- break-through peak as described (Easterbrook-Smith et al.,
Smith et al., 1988) to examine the effects of human HRG 1988).
and C1q on the formation of IIC between ovalbumin and SDS-PAGE. The purity of HRG preparations was
polyclonalrabbitanti-ovalbuminIgG. Theresultsshowthat
checkedbySDS-PAGEanalysiswhichwascarriedoutas
physiological concentrations of HRG bind strongly to C1q described (Laemmli, 1970). Aliquots of HRG were boiled
and to IgG, and inhibit the formation of IIC in Vitro, in either reduced or nonreduced sample buffer and electro-
suggestingapreviouslyundescribedfunctionalroleforHRG. phoresedona12.5%acrylamidegel. Afterelectrophoresis,
protein bands were identified by Coomassie Brilliant blue
MATERIALS AND METHODS staining of the gel. The purity of the HRG preparations as
judged by the intensity of the contaminating bands was
Reagents. Human IgG, human C1q, bovine serum albu- always >95%.
min(BSA,fractionV),ovalbumin(gradeV),andpolyoxy-
Formation of Insoluble Immune Complexes. The forma-
ethylenesorbitanmonolaurate(TWEEN-20)werepurchased
tion of insoluble ovalbumin/anti-ovalbumin IgG immune
fromSigmaChemicalCo.,St.Louis,MO. (Carboxymethyl)-
complexes was carried out by incubating rabbit polyclonal
dextran cuvettes for the IAsys biosensor, EDC [1-ethyl-3-
anti-ovalbumin IgG in 0.01 M phosphate, pH 7.4, 0.15 M
[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]carbodiimide], NHS (N-hydrox-
NaCl (PBS) containing 3 mM NaN and different amounts
3
ysuccinimide),andethanolaminewerepurchasedfromFisons
of HRG and/or C1q for 5 min in a quartz reaction vessel
Applied Sensor Technology, Cambridge, U.K. The homo- (final volume 1 mL) maintained at 37 (cid:176) C. The formation
bifunctional reagent bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate (BS3),
of IIC was initiated by the addition of ovalbumin at an
sulfosuccinimidyl 6-(biotinamido)hexanoate (NHS-LC-Bi-
equivalentantigen:antibodyratio. Sincetheabsorbancedue
otin),andgentleAg/Abelutionbuffer(acuvetteregeneration
to light scattering of a suspension of particles is related to
buffer gentle to the dextran matrix) were purchased from
the average size of the particles, the formation of IIC was
Pierce, Rockford, IL.
monitoredbymeasuringtheabsorbanceat350nmofsamples
Purification of Proteins. Human C1q was purified from using a Varian Cary-1 spectrophotometer as described
humanserumusingBiorex-70ion-exchangechromatography (Easterbrook-Smith et al., 1988).
followed by Sephacryl S-300 gel filtration as previously ELISA Assays. HRG (125 nM) was coupled for 1 h to
described (Tenner et al., 1981). Reduced SDS-PAGE Maxi-sorb ELISA trays in 0.1 M NaHCO buffer (pH 9.0).
3
analysis demonstrated that purification of C1q by this Thetrayswereblockedwith1%(w/v)BSAinPBS(PBS-
procedure resulted in the copurification of two proteins of BSA) and then incubated with C1q in PBS-BSA for 1 h.
32 and 34 kDa. The proteins were electrophoretically Bound C1q was detected using a monoclonal mouse anti-
transferred onto a Problott PVDF membrane, and after C1qantibody(BUS-1)followedbyincubationwithaHRP-
staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, the 32 and 34 kDa conjugatedsheepanti-mouseantibodyandcolordevelopment
bandswereexcisedandsubjectedtoN-terminalsequencing using o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (2.5 mg/mL) in
using an Applied Biosystems Inc. 473A model sequencer. a 0.05 M sodium citrate, 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer
Native human HRG of molecular mass 81 kDa was (pH 5.0) containing 0.03% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide as
purified from fresh human plasma by equilibrating a phos- substrate. The binding of C1q was dose-dependent in the
phocellulosecolumnwithloadingbuffercomprising10mM concentration range tested (15-125 nM). Under these
sodium phosphate (pH 6.8) containing 1 mM dithiothreitol conditions,nonspecificbindingwasassessedusingthemouse
(DTT),1mMethylenediaminetetraaceticacid(EDTA),and mAbanti-DNP-9(amAbto2,4-dinitrophenyl)asacontrol.
0.5 M NaCl. DTT, EDTA, and NaCl were added to the Nosignificantlevelofnonspecificbindingcouldbedetected
plasma at the indicated final concentrations as in loading using the control mAb, indicating that the signal observed
buffer before the plasma was passed through the column. using the BUS-1 mAb reflects C1q specific binding.
The column was extensively washed with loading buffer, AsimilarELISAassaywasalsousedtostudythebinding
andboundHRGwaselutedusingthesamebuffercontaining of rabbit anti-ovalbumin IgG to immobilized HRG. HRG-
2MNaClasdescribedpreviously(Rylattetal.,1981).For coupledMaxi-sorbELISAtrayswereincubatedwithrabbit
some experiments (for interactions between HRG and IgG(0.03-2(cid:237)M)inPBS-BSAovernightatroomtemper-
immobilized C1q), HRG was purified using the loading ature. Bound IgG was detected using a HRP-conjugated
bufferwithoutDTT. Thecolumnwasequilibratedwith10 polyclonal goat anti-rabbit antibody followed by color
--- Page 3 ---
HRG Inhibits Immune Complex Formation Biochemistry, Vol. 36, No. 22, 1997 6655
development. Parallel experiments in which a HRP- was removed by washing extensively (five cycles of con-
conjugated polyclonal goat anti-sheep antibody was used centrationanddilution)inaCentricon10microconcentrator
instead of HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody, or in (Amicon,Inc.,Beverly,MA),beforestoringthebiotinylated
which BSA was coated onto the wells instead of HRG, proteins at -20 (cid:176) C in small aliquots until use.
indicated that the binding was specific for HRG. Biotinylatedproteins(e.g.,biotinylatedHRGorbiotinyl-
DeterminationofBindingConstantsUsingtheBiosensor. ated IgG) were coupled to the immobilized streptavidin.
AnIAsysresonantmirrorbiosensor(FisonsAppliedSensor Biotinylated protein (50 (cid:237)g/mL) in PBS-T (e.g., IgG or
Technology, Cambridge, U.K.) (Cush et al., 1993; Buckle HRG)wasaddedtothestreptavidin-coupleddextrancuvette
etal.,1993)witha(carboxymethyl)dextransensingcuvette equilibrated in PBS-T, and allowed to bind to the im-
wasusedtodeterminethekineticconstantsandaffinitiesof mobilized streptavidin for 5 min. Nonspecifically bound
the HRG-C1q and HRG-IgG interactions. Except where biotinylated protein was removed by washing 3 times with
indicated,allexperimentswereperformedinPBScontaining PBS-T, followed by three washes with 10 mM HCl for 2
0.05%Tween-20and10mg/mLBSA(PBS-BSA-T)and min (for three cycles).
atatemperatureof25(cid:176) C. TheBSA(1%,w/v)wasincluded (c) Binding of Protein Ligands to Proteins on the Bio-
in the buffer to reduce nonspecific binding. The reaction sensor Surface. Before immobilization of the biotinylated
vessel was stirred continuously by the aid of a propeller. proteins on the streptavidin-dextran, nonspecific binding
Bindingwasmeasuredat2sintervals,andthereadoutfrom betweentheproteinligandsandthestreptavidin-dextranwas
the biosensor was in units of arc-seconds. Each binding assessedbytheadditionofdifferentamountsoftheprotein
reaction was routinely followed for 5 min. All binding ligands in PBS-BSA-T to the cuvette. Under these
experiments were performed in triplicate. The “Fast Fit” conditions,nosignificantlevelofnonspecificbindingofany
programsuppliedbyFisonswasusedtoevaluatethekinetic of the protein ligands used in this study could be detected.
constants (George et al., 1995). Preliminary experiments were performed to establish the
(a)CouplingofStreptaVidinorC1qtotheDextranMatrix. concentrationrangeofeachproteinligandsuitableforkinetic
StreptavidinorC1qwascoupledvia(cid:15)-aminogroupstothe analysis. PBS-Twasaddedtotheprotein-coupledcuvette
(carboxymethyl)dextran sensing surface of the IAsys bio- toestablishabaseline(5min),andtheproteinligandtobe
sensor cuvette using 1-ethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]- studiedwasthenaddedinPBS-Tatdifferentconcentrations.
carbodiimideandN-hydroxysuccinimide(EDC/NHS)(Cush Binding of the ligand was studied by monitoring the
et al., 1993; Buckle et al., 1993). This was done by associationphasefor5min. Subsequently,thecuvettewas
equilibrating the cuvette in PBS buffer containing 0.05% washed with PBS-T, and the dissociation phase was
Tween-20 (PBS-T) and then reacting the cuvette with a monitored for 5 min. Bound ligand was removed (cuvette
mixtureofEDC/NHSfor7min. UnreactedEDC/NHSwas regeneration) by washing with either 10 mM HCl or the
washed away with PBS-T followed by three washes with gentleAg/Abelutionbuffer(Pierce). Thebaselinewasthen
0.01Msodiumacetatebuffer(forimmobilizationofstrept- reestablished after washing the cuvette with PBS-T. As
avidin,thepHwasadjustedto4.5,andforC1qimmobiliza- previously,wefoundnoevidencethatthe10mMHClwash
tion, the pH was adjusted to 5.0 using 2 M acetic acid). significantly affected the ability of the proteins to interact
Streptavidin(50(cid:237)g/mL)orC1q(10(cid:237)g/mL)intheindicated under these conditions.
acetatebufferwasaddedtothecuvetteandallowedtoreact (d) EValuation of the Kinetic Constants. The IAsys
with the activated carboxyl groups for 5 min. Uncoupled biosensor was provided with a digital DECpc 450D LP
2
streptavidin or C1q was removed by washing with the computer. Dataobtainedwiththebiosensorweretransferred
apppropriate acetate buffer, and unreacted succinimidyl directly to the “Fast Fit” program (Fison Applied Sensor
groupswereblockedbyincubatingwithethanolamine(1M, Technology). This program uses an iterative curve-fitting
pH 8.5) for 2 min. The cuvette was washed 3 times with to derive the observed rate constant and the maximum
theappropriateacetatebuffer,andthenwashedwithPBS-T responseatequilibriumduetoligandbindingattheparticular
followed by a wash with 10 mM HCl to remove any ligand concentration. The association of a soluble ligand
noncovalentlyboundprotein. Consistentwithstudiesusing with an immobilized macromolecule can be described by
other proteins [e.g., see George et al. (1995)], under these thepseudo-first-orderequationR t )R 0 +E(1-e-k obs t),when
conditionstherewasnoevidencethatthe10mMHClwash onlyonebindingsiteisavailablefortheligand(Cushetal.,
affectedtheabilityoftheimmobilizedC1qtointeractwith 1993). Inthisequation,R istheIAsysresponseattimetin
t
soluble HRG since binding constants did not change unitsofarc-seconds(thisisproportionaltotheconcentration
significantly after repeated washing of the cuvette with 10 ofligand-proteincomplexattimet,R (cid:181) [ligand-protein]),
t t
mM HCl, even when the first HCl wash of the cuvette was R istheIAsysresponseattimet)0inunitsofarc-seconds
0
omitted to avoid possible denaturation of the immobilized induced by the addition of the ligand solution to the buffer
C1q. Biosensorresponsesof(cid:24)500arc-sfortheimmobilized in the cuvette (this represents a net displacement of the
streptavidin and 1800 arc-s for immobilized C1q were biosensorsignal,anditsvalueisdeterminedbytheFastFit
observed. According to the relationship provided by the program for each binding curve analyzed, R (cid:181) [ligand-
0
manufacturer,theseconditionsresultedinthecouplingof3 protein] ),EisthemaximumIAsysresponseinunitsofarc-
0
ng of streptavidin and 11 ng of C1q per mm2 of dextran seconds due to bound ligand at equilibrium (E (cid:181) [ligand-
surface. protein]¥ ),andK
obs
istheobservedrateconstant(termedk
on
(b)BiotinylationofProteinsandBindingtotheBiosensor inFastFit)givenbyk )k +k [ligand](Georgeetal.,
obs off on
Surface. The proteins to be biotinylated were dissolved in 1995). For two binding sites, the “Fast Fit” program uses
PBS at a concentration of 1 mg/mL and then reacted with the equation R t ) R 0 + E 1 (1 - e-k obs1 t) + E 2 (1 - e-k obs2 t) to
NHS-LC-biotin(1mg/mL)for30minatroomtemperature. derive the kinetic constants (Cush et al., 1993). In this
ThereactionwasstoppedbytheadditionofTrisbuffer(pH equation,E andE arethemaximumresponseatequilibrium
1 2
8.0) to a final concentration of 100 mM. Unreacted biotin due to binding of the ligand to the high- and low-affinity