
--- Page 1 ---
THROMBOSIS RESEARCH69;297-305,1993
0049-3848/93$6.00+.00PrintedinUtShAe.
Copyright(1c9)9 3 Pergamon Press Ltd.A llr ightrse served.
HIGH LEVELS OF HISTIDINE-RICH GLYCOPROTEIN AND
TBROMBOTIC DIATHESIS
REPORT OF TWO UNRELATED FAMILIES
Giancarlo Castaman, Marco Ruggeri, Francesco Burei* and
Francesco Rodeghiero
Department of Hematology and Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center,
San Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza; *Department of Medical Emergency,
Hospital of Treviso, Italy
(Received 1.9.1992; acceptedin revised form 3.12.1992 by Editor S. Coccheri)
Abstract Two new families with history of thrombosis and high
levels of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) are
described. The propositus of family 1 died of massive
pulmonary embolism at age 34. Among his relatives, the
mother and the maternal grandmother had suffered from
deep and superficial vein thrombosis in their youth. A
maternal aunt had several episodes of superficial vein
thrombosis (SVT). High levels of HRG were found in the
mother, three siblings and two nephews. In the second
family, the proposita suffered from spontaneous deep
vein thrombosis (DVT) at age 24. The paternal
grandmother and a paternal aunt had several episodes of
SVT and DVT. Also in this family, high levels of HRG
cosegregated with thrombotic symptoms. These new
families confirm that genetically transmitted high
levels of HRG could be associated to familial and
juvenile thrombophilia.
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a non-enzymatic plasma
protein which interacts with the high affinity lysine-binding
site of plasminogen (1) and binds heparin with high affinity (2).
Through these interactions, HRG reduces the amount of free
Key words: thrombophilia - histidine-rich glycoprotein -
thrombosis
297
--- Page 2 ---
298 HRG AND THROMBOPHILIA Vol. 69, No. 3
plasminogen that binds to fibrin clot and lessens the amount of
heparin available for the enhancement of thrombin-antithrombin
III reaction. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that HRG is
present in the e-granules of platelets from where it is released
after thrombin stimulation (3). In this way, platelet-released
HRG may achieve a high local concentration and play a significant
role in modulating fibrinolysis in the microenvironment of the
platelet plug.
Conceivably, high levels of this protein could be associated
to thrombophilia and, in fact, recently a kindred with familial
elevation of HRG and thrombotic symptoms in the propositus has
been reported (4). Subsequently, additional cases have been
published (5-8), sometime associated with high levels of
plasminogen-activator inhibitor (PAI-1) (7,8).
In this study, we report two new families with autosomal
dominant transmission of very high levels of HRG and evidence of
thrombotic diathesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Coasulation assays
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time
(PT), thrombin time (TT) and fibrinogen were assayed on a laser-
automated instrument (ACL, Paderno Dugnano, Italy), using
Instrumental Laboratory (IL) reagents and according to the
manufacturer instructions. Antithrombin III (AT-III) activity was
measured as heparin cofactor activity using the chromogenic
substrate S-2238 (Kabi, Stockholm). Total and free protein S
antigen was assayed by rocket immunoelectrophoresis (Asseraplate,
Stago, Paris). Protein C activity was determined using the
chromogenic substrate S-2366 (Kabi). Plasminogen and c-2-
antiplasmin activities were measured using an amidolytic method
with the chromogenic substrate S-2251 (Kabi). Heparin cofactor
(HC) II activity was measured after activation with dermatan
sulfate using the chromogenic substrate 2 ACOH.H-D-CHG-Gly-Arg-
pNA (Channel Diagnostics, supplied by Cabru, Milan). PAI-
activity was assayed using a chromogenic substrate (Kabi).
HRG antigen was measured by electroimmunoassay (Asseraplate,
Stago). Crossed immunoelectrophoresis (CIE) of a mixture of
normal plasma or serum HRG with that of subjects with high levels
of HRG was carried out using 2.1 % of antiserum (Stago, Paris) in
the second dimension. CIE was performed also with heparin
(Liquemin, Roche, Basel) (16 U/mL, final concentration) in the
first dimension.
CASE REPORT
1) FAMILY B
The relatives (mother, an uncle, the 3 siblings, the 3 nephews
and one niece) of a man died at age 34 of massive pulmonary
--- Page 3 ---
Vol. 69, No. 3 HRG AND THROMBOPHILIA 299
embolism after deep vein thrombosis (DVT) were investigated for
coagulation defects predisposing to thrombophilia (Figure 1). The
propositus (III. 4) at age 25 suffered from superficial vein
thrombosis (SVT) and at age 34 was admitted to the hospital for
spontaneous DVT. Intravenous heparin (25,000 units/day by
continuous infusion) was started. After few hours, severe
dyspnoea developed and a clinical diagnosis of pulmonary embolism
was made. Heparin was augmented (37,500 U/day) and recombinant
tissue-type plasminogen activator (100 mg over two hours) was
started. Despite this treatment, the patient died for cardiac
arrest. Autopsy revealed DVT of right leg and massive pulmonary
embolism with upper right lobe infarction. In addition, signs of
recent myocardial infarction were documented. Unfortunately, no
plasma samples were available for coagulation studies.
The mother (11.3, aged 68) suffered from DVT at age 29 during
puerperium after her third pregnancy and from repeated SVT
episodes. The maternal grandmother (1.2) had DVT after delivery
at age 32 and 35 as well as several episodes of SVT. A maternal
aunt (11.2, aged 69) had several episodes of SVT. The maternal
uncle (11.1, aged 71), the two sisters (III. 2, aged 38, and
111.3, aged 36), the brother (111.1, aged 40) and 3 nephews
(IV.l, aged 4; IV.3, aged 14, and IV.4, aged 12) and the niece
(IV.2, aged 6) were all asymptomatic.
2) FAMILY M
The proposita (111.1, Figure 2) was referred for spontaneous
DVT confirmed by impedance pletysmography at age 24. She had had
no surgical intervention or pregnancy. A paternal aunt (11.3,
aged 56) had suffered from DVT after leg fracture, confirmed by
venography, and the grandmother (1.2) from DVT after delivery and
from repeated SVT. The two sisters, aged 23 and 21, and the
father, aged 50, were asymptomatic.
RESULTS
Table I summarizes the results of coagulation and fibrinolytic
assays of the family members tested. PTT, PT and TT were in the
normal range (not shown). As can be observed, the screening
failed to detect abnormalities of the known proteins whose
deficiency or abnormality is commonly associated with familial or
juvenile thrombophilia.
Very high levels of HRG antigen were consistently demonstrated
over a 3-year period in several members of the two families
(Table II). In both the families, thrombotic symptoms were
exclusively present in members with high levels of HRG. HRG level
was also established in 20 children aged lo-15 and found to be
significantly lower than adults (mean 83 f 20 % vs 103.5 + 18 %;
P < 0.001). This allowed the inclusion among the affected members
also of IV.3, aged 14, and IV.4, aged 12, in family B. Crossed
immunoelectrophoresis of HRG in plasma, with and without heparin,
showed a normal migration pattern (data not shown). Additional