
--- Page 1 ---
ClinicRevAllergImmunol(2008)34:307–312
DOI10.1007/s12016-007-8058-6
Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein Modulation
of Immune/Autoimmune, Vascular, and Coagulation Systems
Miri Blank&Yehuda Shoenfeld
Publishedonline:25January2008
#HumanaPressInc.2007
Abstract Histidine-richglycoprotein(HRG)isplasmagly- update on the molecular, structural, biological, and clinical
coprotein that has a multidomain structure, interacts with propertiesofHRGandassociatedautoimmunityconditions.
many ligands, and exhibit many modulatory functions in
diverse biological systems. HRG ligands include Zn2+, Keywords Histidine-richglycoprotein.Immunecomplex.
tropomyosin, heparin and heparan sulphate, plasminogen, Thrombospodine.Clearance.Protectivemolecule.Lupus.
plasmin,fibrinogen,thrombospondin,IgG,FcgR,andcom- Rheumatoidarthritis.Angiogenesis.Autoimmunity
plement. In many cases, the histidine-rich region of the
moleculeenhancesligandbindingafterinteractionwithZn2+
or exposure to low pH, conditions associated with sites of Introduction
tissue injury or tumor growth. The multidomain nature of
HRG and diverse ligand binding properties indicates that it Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a heparin-binding
canactasanextracellularadaptorprotein,bridgingtogether plasma protein 67- to 75-kDa protein, composed of 507
different ligands mainly on cell surfaces. Apart from cell aminoacidresidues,presentontheplasmaatconcentration
surface molecules, HRG can differentially target IgG, pre- of ~100 μg/ml [1, 2]. HRG is present in the blood of ver-
venting generation of insoluble immune complexes. HRG tebrates,includinghumansandsomeinvertebrates[1,2].In
binds to most cells primarily via heparan sulphate pro- mammals, the majority of HRG is synthesized by the liver,
teoglycans. HRG can enhance clearance of apoptotic and found in the plasma, stored in the α-granules of thrombo-
necroticphagocytesaswellasimmunecomplexes.Theanti- cytes, and is released upon thrombin activation [3]. Struc-
angiogenicpropertiesofHRGarewellestablishedinvitroand turally, the HRG molecule consists of three main domains:
in vivo. HRG can modulate other physiological processes (a) The NH2-terminal domain contains two cysteine pro-
such as cell adhesion and migration, fibrinolysis and tease inhibitor (cystatin)-like stretches, which allows the
coagulation,complementactivation.Thisreviewpresentsan classification of HRG as a member of the cystatin super-
family together with α2HS-glycoprotein, cystatin, and
: kininogen. (b) The central domain is very rich in proline
M.Blank Y.Shoenfeld
and histidine residues, and the human form contains
TheAutoimmuneDiseaseCenterandInternalMedicineB,
multiple GHHPH pentapeptide tandem repeats. The central
SacklerFacultyofMedicine,Tel-AvivUniversity,
TelAviv,Israel domain and the COOH-terminal domain are disulfide
bonded to the cystatin-like stretched in the NH2-terminal
Y.Shoenfeld
domain[4].ThisspecificarchitectureoftheHRGmolecule
IncumbentoftheLauraSchwarz-KippResearchof
facilitates several functions by simultaneous interaction
AutoimmuneDiseases,Tel-AvivUniversity,
TelAviv,Israel with numerous ligands. Previous studies have shown that
HRG binds to heparin, heparan sulfates, thrombospondin
Y.Shoenfeld(*)
(TSP), fibrinogen, plasminogen, certain complement pro-
DepartmentofMedicineB,ShebaMedicalCenter,
teins, divalent metal ions, and immunoglobulins [1, 4–6].
Tel-Hashomer52621,Israel
e-mail:Shoenfel@post.tau.ac.il Based on the multiple ligand binding potential, HRG binds
--- Page 2 ---
308 ClinicRevAllergImmunol(2008)34:307–312
to a wide range of cells such as endothelial cells, fibro- can inhibit the formation of IIC formed by interaction of
blasts, Tcells, macrophages, erythrocytes, platelets, mono- rheumatoid factor (RF) with human IgG-containing IC.
cytoidcell lines,andnecroticcells[5,7–11].Thereceptors Employing light scattering techniques, the effect of HRG
for HRG on these cells have not been finally identified; on the formation of IIC between RF and IC containing
however,inhibitionstudiessuggestthatHRGbindstoTSP, human IgG was tested in three different models [23]. In all
FcR, and glycosaminoglycans [5, 9, 10]. The multi-pattern three models, physiological concentrations of HRG could
binding properties of HRG enable its diverse biological block the formation of IIC induced by RF. Optical
activities. The various functions of HRG molecule known biosensor studies of the RF-IgG interaction also revealed
so far encompass modulation of fibrinogenesis [12], inhi- that HRG can mask theepitopes on IgG recognized by RF,
bition of insoluble immune complex formation [13], en- therefore, block the RF binding to ICs [23]. Furthermore,
hancement of apoptotic cells clearance by macrophages HRG can partially solubilize IIC [23]. These data indicate
[14, 15], anti-angiogenic activities [16–18], and antibacte- that HRG can regulate the formation of IIC induced by RF
rial activity [19]. This review will focus on the biological at three levels: namely, by inhibiting the initial recognition
activities of HRG and its association with autoimmunity. of IgG containing IC by RF, by inhibiting the subsequent
IICofIgGcontainingICbyRF,andbysolubilizingalready
formed IIC. These findings raised the possibility that HRG
HRG as a Protective Molecule may be an important inhibitor of the formation of patho-
genic IC diseases such as SLE and RF.
HRG Binds to Human C1q and IgG and Inhibits Insoluble
Immune Complexes Formation HRG Regulates the Binding of Monomeric IgG
and Immune Complexes to Monocytes
Certain autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus ery-
thematosus (SLE) or rheumatoid arthritis are associated HRG can interact with FcγRI and block monomeric IgG
withtheproduction ofautoantibodies [20,21].Basedonin binding to monocytes. When incorporated in IgG contain-
vitro studies, autoantibodies can be cross-linked with their ing IC, HRG can enhance the uptake of IC by monocytes,
cognate antigens to form insoluble immune complexes probably via its heparan sulfate-binding domain.
(IIC), which can precipitate on the tissues (e.g., kidney or ItiswellestablishedthatmonomericIgGbindstoFcγRI
joint synovial membrane) and lead to a lack of molecular on mononuclear cells and HRG interacts with mouse
transport and consequent tissue injury. Evidence suggests peritoneal macrophages [24]. HRG differentially regulates
that the complement components C3b and C1q can modu- the functions of FcγR subclasses. For example, HRG
lateformationofIICinvitro.C1q isknowntoenhance the reduced the efficiency of FcγRII (Fcγ2b/γ1R)-dependent
formation of IIC by binding to IgG molecules via the C2 phagocytosis of erythrocytes conjugated with monoclonal
domainandmayleadtothecross-linkingofIgGmolecules. IgG2b or IgG1 by macrophages pretreated with HRG for
Studies addressing the effect of HRG and C1q on the 24 h. However, when similar studies were performed using
formation of IIC between ovalbumin and polyclonal rabbit erythrocytescoated with monoclonal IgG2a, HRG wasless
anti-ovalbumin IgG revealed that physiological concentra- effective in inhibiting FcγRII (Fcγ2b/γ1R)-mediated
tions of HRG bind strongly to C1q and to IgG , inhibiting phagocytosis [18]. HRG bind FcγRI expressed on human
the formation of IIC in vitro [6]. C1q and IgG binding monocytic cell lines THP1 and U937 [9]. This claim is
region on HRG are located in the N-terminal fragment. proven by inhibition of HRG binding to THP1 by anti-
HRG bind differentially immunoglobulin subclasses [22]. FcγRI Abs and the lack of IgG interference with the
HRG bind to the kappa L-chain containing IgG1 and IgG2 binding of HRG to the T cell lines lack FcγRI [9]. Pre-
(IgG1kappa and IgG2kappa) inapproximatelyfour and ap- treatment of THP1 cells with HRG at physiological con-
proximatelytenfoldfasterthanthatforthebindingofHRG centration significantly inhibit the binding of monomeric
tolambda L-chain containing IgG1 and IgG2 (IgG1lambda humanIgGtoTHP1cellsviamaskingtheIgGbindingsite
and IgG2lambda), respectively. In contrast, the binding of ontheFcγRI.AdditionofICtoHRG-THP1-IgGcrosstalk
HRG to IgG3kappa and IgG4kappa is 9- and 20-fold did not change the ability of HRG to inhibit the binding of
slowerthanthatforthebindingofHRGtoIgG3lambdaand monomeric IgG to THP1 cells. However, the fact that
IgG4lambda, respectively. The binding of HRG to immu- pretreatment of the cells with HRG did not affect the
noglobulins containing the kappa L-chain (particularly binding of IC to these cells point to the possibility that the
IgG1kappa), but not lambda L-chain, is potentiated in the IC bind low affinity FcR not recognized by HRG.
presence of a physiological concentration Zn2+. Interestingly, pre-incubation of monomeric IgG with HRG
Based on the results that HRG can bind to IgG and enhancetheIgGtargetingTHP1cells.Theincorporationof
inhibittheIIC,itwasofinteresttodeterminewhetherHRG HRG into IC may increase the avidity of these IC for the
--- Page 3 ---
ClinicRevAllergImmunol(2008)34:307–312 330099
cell surface because of the formation of multivalent inter- mAb inhibit HRG binding toHMDM,whereas naked DNA
actions between IC and heparan sulfate receptors for HRG. inhibit HRG binding to apoptotic cells. Thus, anti-FcγRI or
It should be noted that the molar ratio of HRG/IgG is an DNAabrogatetheHRG-dependentingestion.Thesefindings
important factor in determining whether HRG potentiate indicate that HRG, by acting as a bridge between DNA on
(HRG/IgG molar ratio ~1–10:1) or inhibits (HRG/IgG apoptotic cells and FcγRI on HMDM, is an important
molar ratio=50:1) the binding of free IgG to FcγRI. In mediatorfortheclearanceofapoptoticcellsbymacrophages.
the normal physiological conditions, plasma HRG (2 μM) It can be summarized that HRG-dependent clearance
will not enhance the binding of free IgG (~60 μM) to mechanisms are active earlier than other systems such as
monocytes,asthemolarratioofHRG/IgGis~1:30,andthe CRPorTSP,asHRG,bothatacutephaseandphysiological
most HRG would be associated with soluble IgG and concentrations, can potentiate apoptotic cell uptake by
unavailable to interact with FcγRI [9]. macrophages, whereas CRP or TSP-mediated mechanisms
are activated only at acute phase [14]. In parallel, Jones et
HRG Enhance the Clearance of Apoptotic Cells al. [29] showed that HRG can link necrotic cells to mono-
cytesviacytoplasmicligandsinheparin-sulfate-independent
Duringthelastdecade,bunchofevidenceproveadefectin manner exposed on necrotic cells. This interaction is
clearance of apoptotic cells in SLE progression [25–27]. It mediated by the amino-terminal domain of HRG. It is im-
was proposed that long circulating apoptotic cell, which portant to notice that circulating HRG level is significantly
exposenuclearcontentstotheimmunesystem,followedby lowerinlupuspatients[30], suggesting active involvement
generation of neoantigens as a result of re-clustering of the of HRG during acute as well as chronic inflammation. One
internal antigens and post-translation modification process- mayspeculatethatlowlevelsofHRGinlupusplasmamay
esallarethesourceofmorethan100autoantigensinlupus explain partially the decreased clearance potential of
[20, 21]. Because of the brakeage of self tolerance, auto- phagocytic cells.
immune processes are switched on and may induce auto-
immune state. Therefore, efficient masking of autoantigen HRG Modulation of Angiogenesis
epitopesandeffectiveclearanceofapoptoticcellsbyphago-
cytesareessentialtopreventautioimmunereactions.Several HRG as anti-angiogenesis molecule Angiogenesis is criti-
receptorsandligandsareknowntoserveasmediatorsforthe calforthegrowthandproliferationoftumorsaswellasfor
uptakeofapoptoticcellsbymacrophages,somedependenton normal development such as wound healing, placenta
the direct interaction of apoptotic cells with phagocyte development menstrual cycle [31]. In normal physiological
receptors such as CD14, phosphatidylserine, and scavenger condition, the vascular-bad is regulated by pro- and anti-
receptors, in association with cytoskeletal proteins such as angiogenic factors. Prolonged and excessive angiogenesis
ABC1 cassette transporters, dock 180, and Wiskott–Aldrich isimplicatedinanumberofpathologicalconditionssuchas
syndromeproteinonphagocytes.Otherligandbindingrequire rheumatoidarthritis,diabeticretinopathy,andtumorgrowth
anintermediatemoleculebetweenthecirculatingproteinand andmetastases.Thevasculatureisregulatedbypro-andanti-
the cells, for example, the acute phases C-reactive protein angiogenicfactorssuchasfibroblastgrowthfactor(FGF)and
(CRP) at high levels, engages with phosphatidylserine on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), stimulators of
apoptotic cells and activates the classical complement cas- endothelialcellsinvitroandinvivo.Todate,numberofself
cade,resultinginthereleaseofC1qanddepositionofC3bon endogenous factors serve as negative regulators for angio-
apoptoticcells.Additionalexampleisthehighconcentration genesis (e.g., plasma proteins, basmant membrane proteins,
ofsecretedformsofTSPwhichpotentiateuptakebybridging andserineproteaseinhibitors-serpins),allinhibitendothelial
apoptoticcellsandtheα β /CD36complexonmacrophages cellchemotaxixinvitroandinvivo[32].
v 3
[28]. HGR specifically bind to apoptotic T cells and to Zhang et al. [33] demonstrate the anti-angiogenic ac-
mature human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDM) tivity of HRG in vitro. Others show rabbit-HRG-mediated
and potentiate the ingestion of apoptotic cells [14]. The inhibition of endothelial cells tube formation stimulated by
HRG-dependent mechanism mediates removal of apoptotic FGF-2 or VEGF on a Matrigel surface as well as cell pro-
cells under normal conditions, whereas in pathological con- liferation of FGF-2-stimulated endothelial cells [16]. Using
ditionssuchasacuteorchronicinflammatorydisorders,TSP proteolytic fragments of HRG, it could be demonstrated
and CRP/complement-dependent mechanisms also contrib- that the anti-angiogenic activity of HRG is localized in the
ute.Gorganietal.[14]showthatpurifiedHRGincreasethe His/Pro-rich domain and further confirmed in two in vivo
number of human HMDM-containing apoptotic cells and models of angiogenesis: the chorioallantoic membrane of
accelerate the ingestion. HRG potentiate phagocytosis of the chick assay and the mouse Matrigel plug assay.
apoptotic cells through bridging naked DNA on apoptotic Caspase-3 activation is observed in endothelial cells
cells with FcγRI on mature macrophages [14]. Anti-FcγRI stimulated with FGF-2 in the presence of HRG, suggesting