
--- Page 1 ---
Immunology and Cell Biology (2005) 83, 106–118 doi:10.1111/j.1440-1711.2005.01320.x
Review Article
Histidine-rich glycoprotein: A novel adaptor protein in plasma that
modulates the immune, vascular and coagulation systems
ALLISON L JONES, MARK D HULETT and CHRISTOPHER R PARISH
Cancer and Vascular Biology Group, Division of Immunology and Genetics, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
Summary Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is an abundant plasma glycoprotein that has a multidomain
structure, interacts with many ligands, and has been shown to regulate a number of important biological processes.
HRG ligands include Zn2+ and haem, tropomyosin, heparin and heparan sulphate, plasminogen, plasmin, fibrinogen,
thrombospondin, IgG, FcγR and complement. In many cases, the histidine-rich region of the molecule enhances
ligand binding following interaction with Zn2+ or exposure to low pH, conditions associated with sites of tissue
injury or tumour growth. The multidomain nature of HRG indicates that it can act as an extracellular adaptor protein,
bringing together disparate ligands, particularly on cell surfaces. HRG binds to most cells primarily via heparan
sulphate proteoglycans, binding which is also potentiated by elevated free Zn2+ levels and low pH. Recent reports
have shown that HRG can modulate angiogenesis and additional studies have shown that it may regulate other
physiological processes such as cell adhesion and migration, fibrinolysis and coagulation, complement activation,
immune complex clearance and phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. This review outlines the molecular, structural,
biological and clinical properties of HRG as well as describing the role of HRG in various physiological processes.
Key words: angiogenesis, histidine–proline-rich glycoprotein, histidine-rich glycoprotein, inflammation, tumour
metastasis.
Introduction disease such as advanced liver cirrhosis,9,14 AIDS, renal
disease, asthma and pulmonary disease.15 High plasma HRG
Histidine rich glycoprotein (HRG), a single polypeptide chain
levels have also been associated with thrombotic disorders.16,17
α-plasma glycoprotein of approximately 75 kDa, was first
2 HRG can interact with different cell surface receptors, bind a
isolated in 1972.1,2 HRG is found in the plasma of many
wide range of ligands, and it has been implicated in the
vertebrates, including humans, mice, rabbits, rats, chickens
regulation of numerous biological functions, notably angio-
and cows. It is synthesized in liver parenchymal cells,3–5
genesis, immune complex clearance and coagulation. Many
although some studies suggest that HRG may also be pro-
biological properties of HRG have been thoroughly investi-
duced by immune cells such as monocytes and macrophages,6
gated, and this review summarizes the molecular, structural,
and by megakaryocytes.7 The molecule is present in human
biological and clinical properties of HRG as well as review-
plasma at the relatively high concentration of 100–150 µg/mL
ing the role of HRG in various physiological processes.
(∼1.5 µmol/L);5,8,9 plasma HRG levels at birth are approxi-
mately 20% that of adults, and levels gradually increase with
age.5 Clinical studies have shown that families with con- HRG protein structure
genital HRG deficiencies (20–35% of normal plasma levels)
HRG was first isolated and characterized from human serum
fail to show any abnormalities in routine laboratory assays
by Heimburger et al.2 and was subsequently isolated and
of haemostatic and immunological function, suggesting that
characterized from human plasma18,19 and platelets.7,20 Both
a plasma HRG level 20% of normal is probably sufficient
plasma and platelet HRG appear immunohistochemically
for physiological function.10 Interestingly, HRG is one of the
identical.7 The primary structure of human HRG is predicted
few plasma proteins reported to show a marked reduction
to be a 507 amino acid3 multidomain polypeptide consisting
(approximately 50%) during the last trimester of pregnancy.11
of two cystatin-like regions at the N-terminus, a histidine-rich
HRG acts as a negative acute phase reactant whereby
region (HRR) flanked by proline-rich regions (PRR), and a
plasma levels are markedly reduced during the acute non-
C-terminal domain (Fig. 1). The modular domain structure of
specific response to tissue injury.12,13 Thus, levels of plasma
HRG, the location of internal disulphide bonds and predicted
HRG have been found to decrease during acute states of
carbohydrate attachment sites are represented as a schematic
diagram in Figure 1. Perhaps the most striking feature of
HRG is its unusually high content of histidine and proline
Correspondence: Christopher R Parish, Division of Immunology
residues, each constituting approximately 13% of total amino
and Genetics, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian
National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. acids, which are concentrated within the HRR and PRR.1,18,21
Email: christopher.parish@anu.edu.au The high content of both histidine and proline residues has
Received 6 December 2004; accepted 8 December 2004. resulted in HRG also being termed ‘histidine–proline-rich
© 2005 Australasian Society for Immunology Inc.
--- Page 2 ---
AL Jones et al. 107
Figure 1 Modular structure of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG). Human HRG is comprised of three principal domains; namely, an
amino-terminal domain (N1 and N2 regions), a central histidine-rich region (HRR) and a C-terminal domain. The HRR is flanked by two
proline-rich sequences (PRR). Two internal disulphide bonds link the domains (represented by black solid lines); residue 6 in the N1 region
links to residue 486 in the C-terminal domain and residue 185 in the N2 region links to residue 399 in PRR2. There are four intradomain
disulphide bonds: between residues 60 and 71 in the N1 region, residues 87 and 108 in the N1 region, residues 200 and 223 in the N2 region
and possibly residues 306 and 308 in PRR1. These disulphide bonds render various domains of the molecule resistant to proteolytic
cleavage. In most humans, six glycosylation sites are conserved (HRG form-1), with three being present in the N1 region, one in the N2
region and two in the HRR. A polymorphism exists whereby Ser186 is substituted with Pro186, resulting in the loss of a glycosylation site
(Asn184) in the N2 region (HRG form-2). The amino acid residues that comprise the different domains of the human HRG molecule are
listed in the figure.
glycoprotein’ (HPRG).22 Human HRG is also composed of chains of histidine are known to be important for coordination
approximately 14% carbohydrate attached to six predicted with metal ions.26 Modelling studies predict imidazole
N-linked glycosylation sites (Fig. 1).1,3 binding units (within histidine) that protrude outward from
The amino acid sequence of human HRG contains internal the elongated helical structure of the HRR, allowing access
repeat sequences that can be classified into five different for the binding of metal ions22 (Fig. 2B). At physiological pH,
types (I–V). Type V repeats include 12 tandem repeats of five HRG is likely to remain negatively charged, but can acquire a
consensus amino acids.3 The striking repetition of the consen- positive charge either through binding Zn2+ via non-charged
sus sequence is highlighted when the 12 tandem repeats of the histidine residues, or by direct protonation of histidines under
pentapeptide sequence (between amino acids 330 and 389) mild acidic conditions,27 a process that causes a conformation
are arranged in blocks (Fig. 2A). Of the 12 tandem amino acid change in the molecule that is transmitted through the disul-
repeats, the last five repeated sequences are identical, repre- phide bond (Cys399–Cys185) to the N- and C-terminal
senting exact repetitions of a consensus GHHPH motif. It is domains.22 The observation that the interaction between HRG
likely this region evolved via successive duplication of a short and metals or haem is dependent both on pH and intact
stretch of 15 nucleotides (1328–1342) encoding for the histidine residues further supports the idea that the histidine
GHHPH motif.3 residues constitute the metal binding unit within HRG.28 Even
Histidine residues are highly concentrated in the small though HRG binds metal ions in the presence of other metal
region between amino acids 330 and 389 forming the ‘histidine- binding serum proteins such as albumin and transferrin, HRG
rich’ region of the protein.3 Proline residues are more widely does not appear to play a critical role in serum transport of
distributed, although many are concentrated in the ‘proline- these ligands under normal physiological conditions. Both in
rich’ region immediately before and after the HRR. These normal human plasma and plasma from a family with ele-
PRR and HRR contain very few hydrophobic or basic amino vated Zn2+ levels, the majority of Zn2+ ions were found to
acids and are predicted to form a structural framework remain bound to albumin and not to HRG.29 It appears more
supporting a twisted and elongated histidine-rich core.3 likely that the metal binding function of HRG is to modify the
Amino acid sequence comparison between the HRR of HRG conformation of the molecule and thereby regulate subse-
and HRR of high molecular weight kininogen reveals quent biological activity.
approximately 50% identity. The isoelectric point of HRG The cystatin supergene family are more generally known
is approximately 6.45, suggesting that at physiological pH, as cysteine proteinase inhibitors (CPI) and are widely distrib-
HRG remains negatively charged. Amino acid sequence com- uted in mammalian tissues and body fluids. CPI and HRG
parison between PRR of HRG and proline-rich proteins and share approximately 17% amino acid sequence identity,
peptides23–25 from parotid saliva also show up to approxi- approximately 32% nucleotide sequence identity, and con-
mately 50% sequence homology. The characteristic sequence served disulphide bonds in the N-terminal region.30 HRG is
of QGPPP in proline-rich regions of saliva proteins also exists often classified as a kininogen-like member of the CPI,
in HRG as Q/HGPPP. although some researchers suggest that HRG should be clas-
Metal and haem binding to HRG is mediated via the sified as a new family within the cystatin superfamily.30 HRG
numerous histidine residues within the HRR. Imidazole side also shares N-terminal sequence homology with antithrombin
--- Page 3 ---
108 Histidine-rich glycoprotein
Figure 2 Structure of the histidine-rich region (HRR) of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG). (A) Tandem repeats in the HRR of human
HRG cDNA and the derived amino acid sequences. Amino acid residues between 330 and 389 are arranged into a block of sequences of
five columns and 12 rows, highlighting conservation within the tandem repeat sequences. Amino acids identical with the consensus amino
acid sequence ‘Gly-His-His-Pro-His’ are enclosed in a black background. Nucleotides between 1163 and 1342 are arranged into a block of
sequences of 15 columns (five codons) and 12 rows. Nucleotides identical with the consensus sequence ‘GGA CAC CAT CCC CAT’ are
enclosed in a black background. Adapted from Koide et al.3 (B) Structure of a histidine amino acid and projected structure of the HRR of
human HRG. With the chemical structure of histidine, note the imidazole ring formed from two nitrogens within the ring structure. Two
of these imidazoles form the basic metal binding unit. The helical structure of the HRR of HRG is also depicted, demonstrating that the
imidazole side chains protrude from the outer edge of the structure and form the numerous metal binding sites.
III, although no protease inhibitory activity has been reported modular domains rendering numerous multifunctional proper-
for HRG.19,31 ties.3 Studies indicate that HRG is readily cleaved by serine
The secondary structure of HRG has not been entirely proteases such as plasmin from its native form (75 kDa) into
determined, however, the N-terminal region appears to be fragments ranging in size from 10 to 65 kDa.32 Plasmin
primarily composed of β-sheets, with some α-helix content.22 cleavage results in the release of the HRR, leaving N- and
The hydrophilic HRR generates polyproline (II) helical struc- C-terminal fragments connected by a disulphide bridge between
tures, while the C-terminal domain consists of random coil residues 6 and 486,22 which can be separated by further
structures.22 Overall, the predicted secondary structure sug- denaturation and reduction. The C-terminal region is easily
gests that the HRG molecule is organized into separate digested into smaller fragments, whereas the N-terminal
--- Page 4 ---
AL Jones et al. 109
Table 1 Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) ligands
Ligand ∼K Stoichiometry HRG domain Reference
d
Haem 1.5 µmol/L 1:1–1:10 HRR 8,43
Zn2+ 1–4 µmol/L 1:1–1:10 HRR 44
Tropomyosin 2.5 nmol/L ? HRR 27,90
Plasminogen 0.5–1.1 µmol/L† 1:1 N-, C- 67,70
60 nmol/L‡
Plasmin 0.9 µmol/L 1:1 N-, C- 72
Fibrinogen 6.7 nmol/L ? ? 72
Thrombospondin ? 3:1 ? 75
IgG 0.6–250 nmol/L ? N- 80
FcγR ? 3:1 N- 83
C1q 7.8 nmol/L ? N- 81
Heparin and heparan sulphate 7 nmol/L 1:1 N- 48
†Soluble HRG; ‡immobilized HRG.
HRR, histidine-rich region.
domain remains relatively resistant to further proteolysis due and contains two different protein species; one is the deami-
to the stabilizing effect of two intradomain disulphide bridges. nase catalytic subunit, while the other subunit shows similar-
ity to plasma HRG.41 A small degree of divergence occurs
between AMP-HRG and human HRG in the region contain-
HRG gene structure and evolution
ing residues 472–477 and thus the polypeptide is identified as
The human HRG gene has been mapped to chromosome 3, a muscle specific form of HRG, herein referred to as muscle-
position 3q28–q2933,34 and spans approximately 11 kb. Two HRG.41 It has been suggested that muscle-HRG may be an
other members of the human cystatin gene superfamily, α- alternative splice product of the HRG primary transcript,
2
Heremans-Schmid (HS) glycoprotein and kininogen also map producing a unique N-terminal splice variant.41 Muscle-
to this region,35 supporting suggestions that HRG is evolu- specific HRG is clearly localized in type IIB (fast-twitch
tionarily related to the cystatin gene superfamily. A single glycolytic) muscle fibres. It is unknown whether muscle-
gene is predicted to encode HRG in humans and mice,3,36 HRG contributes to the structure of skeletal muscle AMP
with the human gene consisting of eight exons and seven deaminase or whether it simply binds the enzyme.42
introns.3,33,34,37 Each of the N1 and N2 domains is encoded by Comparisons between human,3 mouse and rat,36 and
three exons, while a single exon encodes the HRR, PRR and rabbit22 HRG amino acid and nucleotide sequences provides
C-terminal domain.3,34 Several evolutionary implications arise insights into conserved regions within HRG that are likely to
from an analysis of the HRG gene and protein. The many have an important role in the structure and function of the
tandem repeats strongly suggest that the HRG gene arose by molecule. Alignment of amino acid sequences from mouse,
endoduplication of primordial mini-domains or modules that rat, rabbit and human HRG show a high degree of sequence
correspond with previously described type I–V repeats.34 conservation between species. The overall domain structure
The location of introns within cystatin domains of HRG and of mouse, rat and rabbit HRG is similar to that proposed for
members of the cystatin supergene family (cystatin and human HRG. The PRR are generally the most divergent of the
kininogens) occur in essentially the same positions, suggest- defined regions within HRG. Interestingly, there is very little
ing that the HRG gene is evolutionarily related to the cystatin sequence identity between species in regions that intervene
supergene family.34,37 Thus, both homologous gene structure between domains such as between N2 and PRR1 and also
and the fact that the HRG and kininogen genes co-localize to between PRR1 and HRR, implying that these regions are
a similar region of the human genome supports an evolution- unlikely to have an important functional role and may act as a
ary link between HRG and the cystatin superfamily.37 spacer region between the domains.36
Two common isoforms of HRG have been found in
humans, differing by a molecular weight of approximately
HRG ligands
2 kDa due to a polymorphism occurring in exon 5.38 Form-1
HRG (77 kDa) contains a serine residue at amino acid posi- HRG is known to bind a variety of ligands, including haem
tion 186, whereas form-2 HRG (75 kDa) contains a proline and divalent cations such as Zn2+, tropomyosin, plasminogen,
residue at position 186. The presence of serine at position 186 plasmin, fibrinogen, thrombospondin, IgG, FcγR, C1q, heparin
introduces an N-glycosylation site at Arg184, making form-1 and heparan sulphate. Table 1 lists the various HRG ligands,
more highly glycosylated than form-2 and accounting for the indicating the affinity and stoichiometry with which they bind
2 kDa difference.38 The frequency of the polymorphisms HRG, as well as the domain of HRG with which they interact.
within the population (N = 36) was found to be 0.35 and 0.65
for form-1 HRG and form-2 HRG, respectively.
Haem, Zn2+ and other divalent metal cations
A novel polypeptide of approximately 85 kDa with a
striking similarity to HRG has been isolated from purified Early studies revealed that HRG interacts with haem with a
human skeletal muscle adenosine monophosphate (AMP) stoichiometry of approximately 1:1 to 1:10 and K of ∼1.5 µmol/L.8
d
deaminase. AMP deaminase is composed of four subunits,39,40 The 12 repeats of the GHHPH motif is approximately equal to
--- Page 5 ---
110 Histidine-rich glycoprotein
the number of haem binding sites, suggesting that each factors potentially play a role in tumour pathogenesis and
consensus sequence represents a haem binding unit.43 The metastasis. Furthermore, HRG has been shown to bind to cell
haem–HRG interaction is highly dependent on pH, with surface heparan sulphate,48,55,56 with maximal binding occur-
maximum binding occurring between pH 6.5 and 7.0, pre- ring in the presence of 20 µmol/L Zn2+ and/or under condi-
cisely when histidine side chains become protonated.22,43 tions of slightly acidic pH.48 Although the location of the
Although HRG binds to haem, the physiological relevance of heparin/heparan sulphate binding site in the HRG molecule
this interaction remains unclear. has been a matter of debate for many years, a recent study
HRG interacts with Zn2+ with a K between 1 and 4 µmol/L provides direct evidence that the heparin-binding site is
d
and a stoichiometry of approximately 1:1 to 1:10.8 Studies located in the N-terminal domain. In this study, a recombinant
indicate the HRR of HRG is most likely the domain responsi- HRG N-terminal domain was shown to interact with immobi-
ble for Zn2+ binding due to its high level of histidine residues, lized heparin and cell surface heparan sulphate,48 whereas
with two histidine residues forming each metal binding unit. peptides corresponding to the HRR did not bind to cell
The interaction between HRG and Zn2+ is abolished when surfaces. These data are consistent with the earlier observa-
histidine residues are chemically removed from HRG, tion that the heparin binding site of antithrombin III shares
supporting the model that histidine residues are essential for high sequence homology with the N-terminal domain of
Zn2+ binding.44 Haem and metal ions most likely compete for HRG.3,31
the same histidine binding unit within the HRR.8 It appears It is well documented that the interaction between HRG
that HRG undergoes a conformational change under specific and heparin is also dependent on pH, Zn2+ and histidine
inducible conditions, such as Zn2+ binding or low pH, provid- residues.48,55–59 Jones et al.48 suggested a model whereby full-
ing a regulatory mechanism for the function of HRG.45 HRG length HRG binds via its N-terminal domain with low affinity
interacts in vitro with a variety of other divalent metal cations, to cell surface heparan sulphate in the absence of Zn2+, free
including copper, mercury, cadmium, nickel and cobalt, with Zn2+ levels increasing at sites of platelet degranulation to
a lower affinity of K (∼1 µmol/L). HRG does not interact concentrations that promote heparan sulphate binding. Following
d
with magnesium, manganese or lead.44 HRG can also inhibit chelation of Zn2+ or protonation of the HRR, a change is
the formation of spontaneous apatite calcifications formed induced in HRG that results in the protein binding with higher
from calcium and phosphate ions in vitro,46 presumably by affinity to cell surface heparan sulphate. Thus, the N-terminal
interacting with these divalent cations. Thus, under physio- domain of HRG interacts with heparin and heparan sulphate,
logical conditions, it is possible that HRG may accumulate at whereas the HRR modulates this binding by reacting to
sites of tissue damage and prevent ectopic calcification by changes in local pH and Zn2+ concentration.
inhibiting apatite precipitation.
Tropomyosin
Heparin and heparan sulphate
Tropomyosin forms part of the actin cytoskeleton60 and has
Heparan sulphate proteoglycans are ubiquitously expressed been identified on the surface of fibroblast growth factor
on animal cell surfaces, and in the extracellular matrix (ECM) (FGF)-2-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells
and vascular basement membrane. Heparin is derived from (HUVEC).27,61 HRG binds with high affinity (K ∼2.5 nmol/L)
d
the heparan sulphate proteoglycans within mast cell granules to immobilized tropomyosin in a Zn2+ (10 µmol/L)- or pH
and is more highly sulphated than heparan sulphate.47 HRG (pH < 6.5)-dependent manner. The HRR domain appears to
interacts with heparin with high affinity, and can neutralize interact with negatively charged tropomyosin only when the
the anticoagulant activity of heparin.2,48,49 In purified systems, HRR domain acquires a positive charge either through
HRG and heparin interact with a 1:1 stoichiometry to form a binding to Zn2+ via non-charged histidine residues or by direct
high affinity complex with a K of ∼7 nmol/L.50 HRG (in the protonation of histidines induced under mild acidic condi-
d
presence of physiologically attainable concentrations of Zn2+) tions,27 suggesting that there is a large electrostatic contribu-
has the ability to reverse heparin-induced inhibition of tion to binding. The levels of free Zn2+ in plasma are tightly
smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation by binding heparin regulated and are usually too low to promote binding of HRG
in vivo. Thus, it is possible that HRG may be one of the to endothelial cells.27 Only during coagulation, when acti-
unidentified factors that reverses the inhibitory effect of vated platelets release free Zn2+ from α-granules,62 is the local
heparin on SMC proliferation in arterial microenvironments concentration of free Zn2+ likely to reach the levels (approxi-
in vivo.51,52 In fact, the high affinity of HRG for heparin has mately 10–50 µmol/L) needed to support the binding of HRG
resulted in HRG being investigated as an alternative antidote to tropomyosin on endothelial cells, with this interaction
for heparin overdose.53 believed to mediate antiangiogenic effects.27
HRG interacts with heparan sulphate and masks the
cleavage site on heparan sulphate chains recognized by the
Plasminogen
β-D-endoglycosidase heparanase.54 Thus, in a physiological
environment, soluble HRG may bind to and mask the vascular Plasminogen plays a key role in the fibrinolytic system and is
wall and ECM heparan sulphate, thereby preventing heparan also a HRG ligand. Plasmin activity has been implicated in
sulphate degradation by heparanase. Heparanase not only wound healing, tissue remodelling, angiogenesis, embryo-
cleaves heparan sulphate chains, but also has the important genesis, pathogen and tumour cell invasion, and tumour
role of regulating the release of growth factors from the ECM. metastasis.63 Plasminogen contains lysine binding sites that
Thus, HRG may block heparanase-mediated liberation of are involved in its interaction with fibrin and HRG.18,64–68 The
growth factors from heparan sulphate matrices. Such growth plasminogen binding site within HRG is likely to involve the
--- Page 6 ---
AL Jones et al. 111
N- and C-terminal domains, because immobilized N- and the efficient activation of plasminogen to plasmin by tPA in
C-terminal domains (but not the HRR domain) can bind microenvironments that do not contain fibrin, and thus
plasminogen and stimulate tissue-type plasminogen activator potentially facilitates plasmin-mediated physiological and
(tPA)-mediated cleavage of plasminogen to plasmin.67,69 In pathological events such as ovulation, implantation, inflam-
particular, lysine residues in the C-terminal domain of HRG mation and tumour cell invasion.76
are known to be essential for plasminogen binding,68,69
although the C-terminal lysine residue does not appear to
IgG, FcγR and complement
have an important role in plasminogen binding.67
HRG interacts with both plasmin and plasminogen with a Immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules consist of two identical
K of ∼1.0 µmol/L,18,70 making HRG one of the most impor- heavy (H)- and light (L)-chains. In many species, two types of
d
tant plasminogen binding proteins in plasma, where it has L-chain exist, termed κ and λ, which exhibit little amino acid
been estimated that approximately 50% of plasminogen circu- homology and, unlike H-chains, their function remains
lates bound to HRG. Plasminogen appears to bind to HRG unknown. Gorgani et al.80 showed that HRG can interact with
independently of heparin, indicating that the plasminogen soluble IgG, although the affinity of this interaction is
binding sites on HRG are probably distinct from the heparin enhanced up to fivefold by Zn2+ (20 µmol/L), is dependent
binding sites.68 Numerous studies have confirmed an approxi- upon the IgG subclass, and is influenced by whether the IgG
mate 1:1 to 1:2 stoichiometry of binding between HRG and molecule contains κ or λ L-chains. Thus, IgG1 and IgG2 κ
plasminogen.67,68 Several studies67,69,71 have found that immo- L-chain containing forms have a 50–200-fold greater affinity
bilized HRG (as opposed to soluble HRG) has a much higher for HRG than the IgG1 and IgG2 λ L-chain forms, providing
affinity for plasminogen (K ∼60 nmol/L) resulting in an up the first evidence for a functional difference between these
d
to approximately 100-fold enhancement in plasminogen two L-chains. The HRG–IgG interaction is thought to occur
activation by tPA. Interestingly, 70% of the plasmin formed predominantly via the F region of IgG, and the N-terminal
(ab)
remained surface associated where it was protected from domain of HRG.81 It has also been reported that HRG
inhibition by α-antiplasmin.71 These findings are consistent interacts with Fc receptors, suggested to be FcγRI and FcγRII,
2
with a physiological model where HRG has a higher affinity via its N-terminal domain and possibly C-terminal domains in
for plasminogen when HRG is immobilized on cells via a Zn2+-independent manner.82,83
interaction with cell surface heparan sulphate.67 HRG was first discovered by Heimburger et al.2 when it
copurified with the first component of complement (C1q).
The N-terminal domain of HRG interacts with C1q via two
Fibrinogen
distinct high affinity binding sites (K ∼7.8 nmol/L and
d
HRG specifically interacts with fibrinogen with high affinity ∼37 nmol/L).81 Interestingly, Zn2+ (20 µmol/L) appears to
(K ∼6.7 nmol/L),72 with HRG also being incorporated into inhibit the interaction between HRG and C1q. The inhibitory
d
fibrin clots with an apparent K of ∼0.25 µmol/L. The incor- effect of Zn2+ may be due to an induced conformational
d
poration of HRG into clots has no effect on the conversion of change in the HRG molecule resulting in a loss of C1q
fibrinogen to fibrin, although interestingly, the presence of binding sites. Immobilized HRG also binds many of the
HRG in fibrin clots significantly affects the final structure membrane attack complex (MAC) components,84 suggesting
of the fibrin gel by causing the formation of thinner fibrils. that HRG may play a role in regulating the formation of the
The biological significance of HRG interacting with fibrinogen MAC and modulating complement functional efficiency.
and fibrin may not be limited to the fibrin polymerization
process. Fibrin has been shown to form on the surface of
HRG cell surface receptors
thrombin-activated platelets,7 and has also been detected on
the surface of macrophages,28 thus it is possible that the HRG binds many cell types, including T lymphocytes,85,86
interaction of HRG with fibrinogen may extend to a role in murine erythrocytes,87 EBV-transformed human B cells86 and
cell–cell interactions involving platelets and macrophages.72 platelets88,89 as well as endothelial,27 melanoma, ovarian,67
fibroblast,55 lymphoma56 and myeloid cell lines.80 Despite the
ability of HRG to bind to a diverse range of cell types, HRG
Thrombospondin
cell surface receptors in many cases are not clearly defined.
Thrombospondin (TSP) is a 450 kDa filamentous multi- Nevertheless, four broad classes of cell surface receptors have
functional α-granule ‘adhesive’ glycoprotein of human platelets been identified: (i) heparan sulphate, (ii) tropomyosin, (iii) an
that binds to fibrinogen, fibronectin, heparin and HRG.73,74 unidentified 50–55 kDa protein on T cells and (iv) FcR.
TSP forms a high affinity complex with HRG75 and plas- Heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycans are ubiquitously
minogen (K ∼35 nmol/L) both via lysine binding sites,75,76 expressed on most cells surfaces. Most HRG cell surface
d
and interestingly the HRG–TSP complex is still able to bind binding appears to be mediated via cell surface heparan
plasminogen and heparin. In fact, HRG can form a tri- sulphate. Indeed, early studies by Parish et al.87 concluded
molecular complex with plasminogen, TSP and cell surface that human HRG interacts with anionic carbohydrates, proba-
heparan.75,77 It has been suggested that the complex contains bly heparan sulphates, on murine erythrocytes. Jones et al.48
approximately three HRG and approximately three plasmino- provided clear evidence that HRG interacts with cell surfaces
gen molecules per molecule of TSP,78 with TSP containing via heparan sulphate, with treatment of cells with mammalian
independent binding sites for plasminogen and HRG.79 The heparanase destroying HRG binding sites. Similarly, HRG
physiological significance of a surface associated plasminogen– was shown to bind to CHO-KI cells, but not to a mutant form
HRG–TSP complex is unclear, although it appears to allow of CHO-KI cells that lacks cell surface heparan sulphate,
--- Page 7 ---
112 Histidine-rich glycoprotein
providing further support for heparan sulphate being one of process that may result in plasmin generation within a con-
the primary HRG cell surface ligands. In addition, Guan fined and regulated local environment. Subsequent studies67
et al.27 showed that HRG binds to heparan sulphate proteogly- have confirmed that HRG can target plasminogen/plasmin to
cans expressed on the surface of HUVEC. the surface of cells under conditions of elevated free Zn2+
Recent studies have identified tropomyosin as a novel cell (∼20 µmol/L) or low pH (pH < 6.5). Because plasmin has an
surface receptor for HRG.27,90 Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 important role in aiding ECM degradation by invading cells,
stimulation of HUVEC causes translocation of tropomyosin HRG may potentiate leucocyte entry into inflammatory sites,
to the cell surface. Guan et al.27 observed that HRG binds with angiogenesis and tumour metastasis via this mechanism.
higher affinity to FGF-2 stimulated HUVEC (K ∼6 nmol/L) The pH dependence of the HRG–GAG interaction is likely
d
than to non-stimulated cells (K ∼55 nmol/L), with subse- to be physiologically relevant as the local pH can drop by as
d
quent work revealing that tropomyosin is the high affinity much as one pH unit under conditions of hypoxia or
binding site for HRG on FGF-2 stimulated HUVEC. Interest- ischemia,92,93 or 0.5 of a pH unit during an inflammatory
ingly, the binding of HRG to immobilized tropomyosin and response due to lactic acidosis.94 Thus, HRG may function as
FGF-2 stimulated HUVEC requires Zn2+ at pH 7.5.27 How- a pH sensor that binds cell surface GAG only when local pH
ever, binding can occur in the absence of Zn2+ at pH 6.0. decreases or when local Zn2+ increases, such as during tissue
Thus, at physiological pH, binding is dependent on the injury or tumour metastasis.45,67 Due to the HRR of HRG
presence of Zn2+ whereas binding can also occur in the acquiring a positive charge upon protonation, HRG can be
absence of Zn2+ at slightly acidic pH (pH < 6.5). described as a facultative polycation.69 It seems likely that
Studies with human peripheral blood T lymphocytes many of the biological actions of HRG are related to its
suggests that heparan sulphate-independent binding of HRG polycationic nature, implying that the functional effects of
to cell surfaces can occur.86 Kinetic analyses suggested both HRG are regulated by pH and expressed only under physio-
high affinity (K ∼19 nmol/L) and low affinity (K ∼500 nmol/L) logical conditions that produce local acidosis.
d d
binding sites on human T cells for HRG. Furthermore, unlike
HRG binding to most other cell types, the presence of Zn2+
Modulator of cell proliferation and cell adhesion
did not significantly enhance HRG binding to T lymphocytes.86
An unidentified 50–55 kDa protein isolated from T lympho- Studies suggest that HRG modulates cell proliferation by
cyte lysates was identified as the specific HRG T-cell surface interacting with cell surface GAG. HRG has been reported to
receptor. More recent studies by Olsen et al.56 further induce proliferation of cultured arterial smooth muscle cells
investigated HRG binding to T cells using human and mouse by inhibiting the antiproliferative effects of heparin.51,52 Other
T cell lines, and found that Zn2+ profoundly potentiated HRG studies however, indicate that HRG inhibits cell proliferation.
binding to T lymphocytes, and that heparin inhibited binding, Shatsky et al.85 showed that HRG was capable of suppressing
contrary to the results of Saigo et al.86 Thus, perhaps heparan T-cell proliferation. Brown and Parish55 also showed that
sulphate may be a more important ligand on activated and/or HRG inhibits proliferating fibroblasts by interacting with cell
transformed T lymphocytes56 than on resting peripheral blood surface heparan sulphate and subsequently inhibiting the
T lymphocytes.86 binding of acidic and basic FGF to these cells. These findings
Finally, Fc receptors have been shown to be a ligand for support a role for HRG in modulating the release of FGF from
HRG on a number of different cell types. Chang et al.91 the ECM and basement membranes and also in inhibiting the
demonstrated that HRG binds to inflammatory peritoneal interaction of FGF with cell surface heparan sulphates. Thus
macrophages via the low affinity Fc receptor, FcγRII, whereas HRG has been reported to both inhibit and enhance cell
studies by Gorgani et al.82 suggested that HRG can interact proliferation by interacting with heparan sulphate on cell
with FcγRI, a high affinity Fc receptor on myeloid cells. surfaces.
Long-term treatment of peritoneal macrophages with
Functional effects of HRG physiological concentrations of HRG results in the loss of cell
adherence, probably mediated via reduced synthesis of cell
pH sensor and Zn2+ detector
surface adhesive proteins.91 Olsen et al.56 also found that
Numerous studies indicate that the interaction between HRG HRG inhibits the adhesion properties of murine T-cell lines to
and Zn2+ is highly dependent on pH. Morgan44 hypothesized plastic culture dishes, but that HRG promoted homotypic
that the unique, conserved HRR domain of HRG acts as a pH adhesion between the cells. In contrast, Lamb-Wharton and
sensor, providing a mechanism for regulating HRG activity. Morgan95 reported that HRG promotes T-cell adhesion, whilst
In their model, histidine side chains of HRG become proto- also inducing a change in morphology. HRG induced MOLT-3
nated when local pH falls during conditions such as ischemia cells either to produce extended cellular processes or to
or hypoxia. The HRR becomes positively charged, allowing become elongated at the poles. The changes in adherence
HRG to subsequently strongly bind negatively charged GAG status and morphology observed in MOLT-3 cells are similar
on cell surfaces. This pH sensor phenomenon may become to those of leucocytes preparing to migrate though the micro-
physiologically relevant as it allows HRG to function as an vascular system to sites of inflammation, and suggest that
adaptor molecule, co-immobilizing soluble proteins, such as HRG may be involved in regulating early adhesion events of
plasminogen, onto cell surface GAG only under specific T lymphocytes during immune responses and at sites of
conditions. In support of this concept, in vitro studies showed inflammation.95 In addition, HRG has the ability to inhibit
that immobilized, but not soluble, HRG stimulates plasmino- autorosetting (cell adhesion between autologous murine lym-
gen activation.69 Thus, in a physiological setting, cell surface phocytes and erythrocytes), and thus HRG is also known as
GAG can bind HRG in vivo when the local pH is lowered, a ‘autorosette inhibition factor’.6,96–98
--- Page 8 ---
AL Jones et al. 113
Table 2 Multiple effects of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) on angiogenesis
Enhancing effects
Over-rides the antiangiogenic effects of thrombospondin-1113†
May tether plasminogen/plasmin to the surface of endothelial cells and aid cell migration and invasion67‡
Inhibitory effects
Blocks FGF-1 and FGF-2 action by preventing FGF binding to heparan sulphate in the ECM and on endothelial cell surfaces55‡
Prevents heparanase-mediated release of angiogenic growth factors from the ECM by masking heparanase cleavage sites in ECM heparan
sulphate54‡
Delivers an antiangiogenic signal to endothelial cells by binding to cell surface tropomyosin via its HRR27,90†,‡
†Probably an angiogenesis-specific effect; ‡processes that are likely to be enhanced by elevated extracellular free Zn2+ levels (usually provided by
degranulating platelets) and by acidosis (pH < 6.5).
ECM, extracellular matrix; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HRR, histidine-rich region.
Regulator of coagulation and fibrinolysis formation of IIC. Hence, evidence suggests that HRG may
have an important role in the formation, solubilization and
HRG has been found to modulate various components of the
subsequent clearance of IIC in vivo.
coagulation cascade. HRG can bind to heparin (a potent anti-
HRG has also been shown to biphasically modulate the
coagulant), resulting in a failure of mast cell-released heparin
expression of FcγR and its associated phagocytic function by
to inhibit the procoagulant activity of monocytes at sites of
murine peritoneal macrophages. After 1–2 h of HRG treat-
inflammation and thrombosis.99,100 Clinical studies also support
ment, FcγR expression is rapidly upregulated on inflam-
an interaction between HRG and heparin in vivo, HRG
matory peritoneal macrophages, resulting in enhanced
blocking the normal interaction between heparin and anti-
phagocytosis of opsonized sheep erythrocytes, but after
thrombin III.78,101,102 Other studies have investigated whether
16–48 h of treatment, FcγR expression is downregulated,
HRG can act as an antifibrinolytic agent due to its high
resulting in significantly reduced phagocytosis of opsonized
affinity interaction (K ∼0.5–1.1 µmol/L) with plasminogen.
d sheep erythrocytes.83,91 Both the N-terminal and C-terminal
HRG reportedly binds to lysine binding sites on plasminogen,
domains of HRG appear to be important for regulating
thus preventing plasminogen from interacting with fibrinogen
macrophage phagocytic function.83
and α-antiplasmin. Although there is no direct evidence to
2 Recent studies by Gorgani et al.107 demonstrated that
support this view, it has been proposed by numerous groups
HRG can increase the rate of phagocytosis of apoptotic cells
that HRG inhibits the interaction of plasminogen with fibrin
by human monocyte derived macrophages (HMDM). Based
clots, thus indirectly inhibiting plasmin mediated fibrino-
on these observations, the authors postulated that HRG forms
lysis.18 This proposed antifibrinolytic effect of HRG would be
a bridge between monocytic and apoptotic cells via FcγRI on
expected to potentiate clot formation and persistence in the
HMDM and naked DNA on apoptotic cells. Thus, HRG may
vasculature and in tissues. In contrast to the antifibrinolytic
assist in the removal of apoptotic cells under normal physio-
effect of HRG, other studies69,71 have demonstrated that surface
logical conditions, whereas other proteins such as C-reactive
immobilized HRG can act as a pro-fibrinolytic agent by
protein take over during more pathological or chronic
enhancing fibrinolysis. Immobilized HRG binds plasminogen
inflammatory disorders.107 Gorgani et al.107 suggest that HRG
with high affinity resulting in an approximately 30-fold
may protect individuals from the development of systemic
increase in the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin by tPA,
autoimmunity by promoting the efficient removal of apop-
with theoretically a concomitant increase in fibrinolytic
totic cells. This theory is supported by HRG levels being low
potential in the microenvironment of fibrin clots.69 Collec-
in the sera of human SLE patients.108 However, future work
tively, these data suggest that HRG can regulate coagulation
with HRG knockout mice and mice predisposed to SLE
and fibrinolysis, but whether this represents a major func-
should provide more data to evaluate this hypothesis.
tion of HRG in vivo remains to be established.
Regulator of angiogenesis
Modulator of immune complex clearance and
It has been reported that HRG exhibits both enhancing and
FcγR-mediated phagocytosis
inhibitory effects on angiogenesis, which are summarized in
Certain autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythe- Table 2; some of these effects are highly specific to angio-
matosus (SLE) are associated with the production of insoluble genesis. During angiogenesis, new capillary blood vessels are
immune complexes (IIC) and consequent tissue injury.103,104 formed from pre-existing vessels in response to angiogenic
Gorgani et al.81,105 found that physiological concentrations stimuli. TSP is known to be a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis
of the N-terminal domain of HRG can inhibit the first stage of by binding to a CLESH-1 (CD36, LIMPII, emp, SR-BI
formation of IIC,106 suggesting that HRG may have a role in homology sequence 1) motif in CD36.109,110 The TSP
regulating IIC formation in vivo. HRG probably inhibits IIC sequence ‘CSVTCG’ is thought to be responsible for deliver-
formation by preventing Fc–Fc interactions and by masking ing the antiangiogenic signal to CD36, this peptide having
epitopes on IgG recognized by rheumatoid factors.81,105 been shown to possess antiangiogenic activity as a free
Although HRG was also found to promote solubilization of peptide.111,112 There are two regions of HRG with significant
already formed IIC, HRG was more effective at inhibiting the homology to the CLESH-1 motif, between amino acid
--- Page 9 ---
114 Histidine-rich glycoprotein
Figure 3 Model of inhibition of the antiangiogenic effect of thrombospondin (TSP)-1 by histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG). Angio-
genesis induced by basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is inhibited by TSP-1 through the interaction of the TSP type-1 repeat with the
CLESH-1 domain of the signalling receptor CD36 (centre). HRG also contains a CLESH-1 motif and upon binding TSP-1, inhibits the
interaction of TSP-1 with CD36, thereby inhibiting the antiangiogenic effect of TSP (right). Adapted from Simantov et al.113
residues 155–213 in the N2 domain, and between residues HRR.90 In addition, Olsson et al.115 showed that treatment of
428–503 in the C-terminal domain.113 Simantov et al.113 pro- fibrosarcoma-bearing mice with HRG resulted in decreased
posed a model in which HRG inhibits the antiangiogenic tumour angiogenesis and a decrease in tumour volume. Simi-
effects of TSP by blocking the interaction between TSP and larly, peptides derived from the HRR have also been shown to
CD36, thereby preventing delivery of the antiangiogenic inhibit angiogenesis and tumour growth in vivo.90 Additional
signal (Fig. 3). Thus, HRG may act as a natural modulator of studies also identified tropomyosin to be the key HRR
angiogenesis by antagonizing the effect of endogenous TSP.113 binding molecule on human endothelial cells, with binding
Interestingly, HRG may also provide a mechanism by which being optimal under conditions of elevated Zn2+ and/or acidic
tumours escape or become resistant to the antiangiogenic pH (Fig. 4).27 Because tropomyosin lacks a transmembrane
effects of TSP. Immunohistochemical studies of breast cancer domain, it is likely that other proteins in the endothelial cell
specimens show HRG co-localizes with TSP in the tumour membrane may associate with tropomyosin and play a role in
matrix and that the interaction masks the antiangiogenic the antiangiogenic signalling. It has been suggested that HRG
epitope of TSP. Therefore, in areas where TSP is an important mediates its antiangiogenic activity by inducing apoptosis in
inhibitor of angiogenesis, HRG may serve as a modulator activated endothelial cells and reducing cell proliferation.114
of TSP activity by promoting angiogenesis.113 Furthermore, Olsson et al.115 also suggested that HRG acts by decreasing
it has also been reported that HRG may tether plasminogen/ the attachment of endothelial cells to vitronectin and reducing
plasmin to the surface of cells and potentially aid endothelial endothelial cell migration. The potent antiangiogenic effects
cell migration and invasion during angiogenesis, although this of specific peptide sequences derived from the HRR of HRG
phenomenon may also aid the invasion of many different cell are currently being pursued for possible development as
types.67 antiangiogenic agents.90
Conversely, other studies indicate that HRG exhibits
antiangiogenic activity by various mechanisms.27,54,55,90,114,115
First, HRG binds to heparan sulphate on the surface of
Conclusion
endothelial cells and prevents the heparan sulphate serving as
a coreceptor for various FGF.55 Clearly this inhibitory effect HRG is a multidomain molecule that interacts with many
is not restricted to angiogenesis, but could also block FGF- ligands. The multidomain structure of HRG suggests that the
dependent proliferation of many cell types. Second, HRG molecule may act as an adaptor protein that can bring together
prevents heparanase-mediated release of angiogenic growth different ligands under specific conditions. Furthermore, the
factors, such as FGF, from the ECM by masking heparanase HRR of HRG is highly responsive to Zn2+ and pH, which
cleavage sites in ECM heparan sulphate.54 Again, this inhibi- causes a conformation change within the HRR that can be
tory effect is probably not restricted to angiogenesis. Third, transmitted to other domains of the molecule to regulate their
the HRR of HRG has been shown to deliver antiangiogenic function. The HRR is also the domain of the molecule that
signals to endothelial cells.27,90,114,115 Initially HRG was shown can interact with tropomyosin on tumour cells, resulting in the
to inhibit tube formation and the proliferation of endothelial production of an antiangiogenic signal. Thus, although HRG
cells,114 as well as blocking angiogenesis in in vivo models.27 has been shown to interact with a variety of ligands, and to
The antiangiogenic effect of HRG appeared to be mediated regulate numerous biological activities, much more remains
specifically through the GHHPH consensus region within the to be discovered about this intriguing molecule.
--- Page 10 ---
AL Jones et al. 115
Figure 4 Model of the antiangiogenic effect mediated via the histidine-rich region (HRR) of histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG).
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 binds to its cell surface receptor and stimulates higher levels of expression of tropomyosin on the surface
of endothelial cells. The HRR domain of HRG then binds with high affinity to cell surface tropomyosin and delivers an antiangiogenic
signal to the endothelial cells. Tropomyosin lacks a transmembrane domain, suggesting that it may require a coreceptor to mediate the
antiangiogenic signal. The binding of the HRR to tropomyosin is dependent on pH and Zn2+. At physiological pH, binding of the HRR to
tropomyosin is dependent on the presence of Zn2+, with local elevated free Zn2+ concentrations (10–50 µmol/L) being provided by
degranulating platelets, although binding can also occur in the absence of Zn2+ at slightly acidic pH (pH = 6.5). The antiangiogenic signal
causes increased apoptosis, decreased cell proliferation and cell migration. This schematic diagram was based on results discussed in
Donate et al.,90 Guan et al.27 and Olsson et al.115
Acknowledgements
6 Sia DY, Rylatt DB, Parish CR. Anti-self receptors. V. Properties
This work was supported in part by a NHMRC Program of a mouse serum factor that blocks autorosetting receptors on
Grant and a NSW Cancer Council Program Grant. MDH lymphocytes. Immunology 1982; 45: 207–16.
7 Leung LL, Harpel PC, Nachman RL, Rabellino EM. Histidine-
is the recipient of a Viertel Senior Medical Research
rich glycoprotein is present in human platelets and is released
Fellowship.
following thrombin stimulation. Blood 1983; 62: 1016–21.
8 Morgan WT. Human serum histidine-rich glycoprotein. I. Inter-
actions with heme, metal ions and organic ligands. Biochim. Bio-
References
phys. Acta 1978; 535: 319–33.
1 Haupt H, Heimburger N. [Human serum proteins with high 9 Saito H, Goodnough LT, Boyle JM, Heimburger N. Reduced
affinity for carboxymethylcellulose. I. Isolation of lysozyme, histidine-rich glycoprotein levels in plasma of patients with
C1q and 2 hitherto unknown globulins.] Hoppe Seylers Z. Phys- advanced liver cirrhosis. Possible implications for enhanced
iol. Chem. 1972; 353: 1125–32 (in German). fibrinolysis. Am. J. Med. 1982; 73: 179–82.
2 Heimburger N, Haupt H, Kranz T, Baudner S. [Human serum 10 Shigekiyo T, Kanazuka M, Azuma H, Ohshima T, Kusaka K,
proteins with high affinity to carboxymethylcellulose. II. Physico- Saito S. Congenital deficiency of histidine-rich glycoprotein:
chemical and immunological characterization of a histidine- failure to identify abnormalities in routine laboratory assays of
rich 3,8S-2-glycoprotein (CM–protein I).] Hoppe Seylers Z. hemostatic function, immunologic function, and trace elements
Physiol. Chem. 1972; 353: 1133–40 (in German). [see comments]. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 1995; 125: 719–23.
3 Koide T, Foster D, Yoshitake S, Davie EW. Amino acid sequence 11 Halbmayer WM, Hopmeier P, Feichtinger C, Rubi K, Fischer M.
of human histidine-rich glycoprotein derived from the nucleotide Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) in uncomplicated pregnancy
sequence of its cDNA. Biochemistry 1986; 25: 2220–25. and mild and moderate preeclampsia. Thromb. Haemost. 1992;
4 Drasin T, Sahud M. Blood-type and age affect human plasma 67: 585–6.
levels of histidine-rich glycoprotein in a large population. 12 Saigo K, Yoshida A, Ryo R, Yamaguchi N, Leung LL. Histidine-
Thromb. Res. 1996; 84: 179–88. rich glycoprotein as a negative acute phase reactant. Am. J. Hema-
5 Corrigan JJ, Jeter MA, Bruck D, Feinberg WM. Histidine-rich tol. 1990; 34: 149–50.
glycoprotein levels in children: the effect of age. Thromb. Res. 13 Jespersen J, Gram J, Bach E. A sequential study of plasma
1990; 59: 681–6. histidine-rich glycoprotein and plasminogen in patients with
--- Page 11 ---
116 Histidine-rich glycoprotein
acute myocardial infarction and deep vein thrombosis. Thromb. 33 van den Berg EA, le Clercq E, Kluft C et al. Assignment of the
Haemost. 1984; 51: 99–102. human gene for histidine-rich glycoprotein to chromosome 3.
14 Leebeek FW, Kluft C, Knot EA, De Maat MP. Histidine-rich Genomics 1990; 7: 276–9.
glycoprotein is elevated in mild liver cirrhosis and decreased in 34 Koide T. Human histidine-rich glycoprotein gene: evidence for
moderate and severe liver cirrhosis. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 1989; evolutionary relatedness to cystatin supergene family. Thromb.
113: 493–7. Res. 1988; 8 (Suppl.): 91–7.
15 Morgan WT. Serum histidine-rich glycoprotein levels are 35 Rizzu P, Baldini A. Three members of the human cystatin gene
decreased in acquired immune deficiency syndrome and by superfamily, AHSG, HRG, and KNG, map within one megabase
steroid therapy. Biochem. Med. Metab. Biol. 1986; 36: 210–13. of genomic DNA at 3q27. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 1995; 70:
16 Kuhli C, Scharrer I, Koch F, Hattenbach LO. Recurrent retinal 26–8.
vein occlusion in a patient with increased plasma levels of 36 Hulett MD, Parish CR. Murine histidine-rich glycoprotein: Clon-
histidine-rich glycoprotein. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2003; 135: 232–4. ing, characterization and cellular origin. Immunol. Cell Biol.
17 Engesser L, Kluft C, Briet E, Brommer EJ. Familial elevation of 2000; 78: 280–87.
plasma histidine-rich glycoprotein in a family with throm- 37 Hennis BC, Frants RR, Bakker E et al. Evidence for the absence
bophilia. Br. J. Haematol. 1987; 67: 355–8. of intron H of the histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) gene:
18 Lijnen HR, Hoylaerts M, Collen D. Isolation and characteriza- genetic mapping and in situ localization of HRG to chromosome
tion of a human plasma protein with affinity for the lysine 3q28-q29. Genomics 1994; 19: 195–7.
binding sites in plasminogen. Role in the regulation of fibrino- 38 Hennis BC, van Boheemen PA, Wakabayashi S et al. Identifica-
lysis and identification as histidine-rich glycoprotein. J. Biol. tion and genetic analysis of a common molecular variant of
Chem. 1980; 255: 10 214–22. histidine-rich glycoprotein with a difference of 2kD in apparent
19 Koide T, Odani S, Ono T. The N-terminal sequence of human molecular weight. Thromb. Haemost. 1995; 74: 1491–6.
plasma histidine-rich glycoprotein homologous to antithrombin 39 Boosman A, Chilson OP. Subunit structure of AMP-deaminase
with high affinity for heparin. FEBS Lett. 1982; 141: 222–4. from chicken and rabbit skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 1976;
20 Leung LL, Harpel PC, Nachman RL. Platelet histidine-rich 251: 1847–52.
glycoprotein. Methods Enzymol. 1989; 169: 268–76. 40 Coffee CJ, Kofke WA. Rat muscle 5′-adenylic acid aminohydro-
21 Koide T, Odani S, Ono T. Human histidine-rich glycoprotein: lase. I. Purification and subunit structure. J. Biol. Chem. 1975;
simultaneous purification with antithrombin III and characteriza- 250: 6653–8.
tion of its gross structure. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 1985; 98: 41 Ranieri-Raggi M, Montali U, Ronca F et al. Association of puri-
1191–200. fied skeletal-muscle AMP deaminase with a histidine-proline-
22 Borza DB, Tatum FM, Morgan WT. Domain structure and rich-glycoprotein-like molecule. Biochem. J. 1997; 326: 641–8.
conformation of histidine-proline-rich glycoprotein. Biochemis- 42 Sabbatini AR, Ranieri-Raggi M, Pollina L et al. Presence in
try 1996; 35: 1925–34. human skeletal muscle of an AMP deaminase-associated
23 Saitoh E, Isemura S, Sanada K. Complete amino acid sequence protein that reacts with an antibody to human plasma histidine-
of a basic proline-rich peptide, P-D, from human parotid saliva. proline-rich glycoprotein. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 1999; 47:
J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 1983; 93: 495–502. 255–60.
24 Saitoh E, Isemura S, Sanada K. Complete amino acid sequence 43 Katagiri M, Tsutsui K, Yamano T, Shimonishi Y, Ishibashi F.
of a basic proline-rich peptide, P-F, from human parotid saliva. Interaction of heme with a synthetic peptide mimicking the
J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 1983; 93: 883–8. putative heme-binding site of histidine-rich glycoprotein. Bio-
25 Azen E, Lyons KM, McGonigal T et al. Clones from the human chem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1987; 149: 1070–76.
gene complex coding for salivary proline-rich proteins. Proc. 44 Morgan WT. Interactions of the histidine-rich glycoprotein of
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 1984; 81: 5561–5. serum with metals. Biochemistry 1981; 20: 1054–61.
26 Sundberg RJ, Martin RB. Interactions of histidine and other 45 Borza DB, Morgan WT. Histidine-proline-rich glycoprotein as
imidazole derivatives with transition metal ions in chemical and a plasma pH sensor. Modulation of its interaction with glyco-
biological systems. Chemical Reviews 1974; 74: 471–517. saminoglycans by pH and metals. J. Biol. Chem. 1998; 273:
27 Guan X, Juarez JC, Qi X et al. Histidine-proline rich glycopro- 5493–9.
tein (HPRG) binds and transduces anti-angiogenic signals 46 Schinke T, Koide T, Jahnen-Dechent W. Human histidine-rich
through cell surface tropomyosin on endothelial cells. Thromb. glycoprotein expressed in SF9 insect cells inhibits apatite forma-
Haemost. 2004; 92: 403–12. tion. FEBS Lett. 1997; 412: 559–62.
28 Morgan WT. The histidine-rich glycoprotein of serum has a 47 Bernfield M, Gotte M, Park PW et al. Functions of cell surface
domain rich in histidine, proline, and glycine that binds heme heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1999; 68:
and metals. Biochemistry 1985; 24: 1496–501. 729–77.
29 Guthans SL, Morgan WT. The interaction of zinc, nickel and 48 Jones AL, Hulett MD, Parish CR. Histidine-rich glycoprotein
cadmium with serum albumin and histidine-rich glycoprotein binds to cell-surface heparan sulfate via its N-terminal domain
assessed by equilibrium dialysis and immunoadsorbent chroma- following Zn2+ chelation. J. Biol. Chem. 2004; 279: 30 114–22.
tography. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1982; 218: 320–28. 49 Lijnen HR, Hoylaerts M, Collen D. Neutralization of heparin
30 Koide T, Odani S. Histidine-rich glycoprotein is evolutionarily activity by binding to human histidine-rich glycoprotein.
related to the cystatin superfamily. Presence of two cystatin Thromb. Res. 1983; 29: 443–6.
domains in the N-terminal region. FEBS Lett. 1987; 216: 17–21. 50 Lijnen HR, Hoylaerts M, Collen D. Heparin binding properties
31 Koide T, Foster D, Odani S. The heparin-binding site(s) of of human histidine-rich glycoprotein. Mechanism and role in the
histidine-rich glycoprotein as suggested by sequence homology neutralization of heparin in plasma. J. Biol. Chem. 1983; 258:
with antithrombin III. FEBS Lett. 1986; 194: 242–4. 3803–8.
32 Smith A, Nuiry I, Morgan WT. Proteolysis of histidine-rich 51 Mori S, Shinohata R, Renbutsu M et al. Histidine-rich glyco-
glycoprotein in plasma and in patients undergoing thrombolytic protein plus zinc reverses growth inhibition of vascular smooth
therapy. Thromb. Res. 1985; 40: 653–61. muscle cells by heparin. Cell Tissue Res. 2003; 312: 353–9.
--- Page 12 ---
AL Jones et al. 117
52 Hajjar DP, Boyd DB, Harpel PC, Nachman RL. Histidine-rich 69 Borza DB, Morgan WT. Acceleration of plasminogen activation
glycoprotein inhibits the antiproliferative effect of heparin on by tissue plasminogen activator on surface-bound histidine-
smooth muscle cells. J. Exp. Med. 1987; 165: 908–13. proline-rich glycoprotein. J. Biol. Chem. 1997; 272: 5718–26.
53 Fu CL, Horn MK 3rd. Histidine-rich glycoprotein plus zinc to 70 Kluft C, Los P. Modified crossed immunoelectrophoresis to
neutralize heparin. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 2002; 139: 211–17. study with whole plasma the reversible complex formation of
54 Freeman C, Parish CR. A rapid quantitative assay for the detec- histidine-rich glycoprotein with plasminogen. Thromb. Haemost.
tion of mammalian heparanase activity. Biochem. J. 1997; 325: 1988; 60: 411–14.
229–37. 71 Silverstein RL, Nachman RL, Leung LL, Harpel PC. Activation
55 Brown KJ, Parish CR. Histidine-rich glycoprotein and platelet of immobilized plasminogen by tissue activator. Multimolecular
factor 4 mask heparan sulfate proteoglycans recognized by acidic complex formation. J. Biol. Chem. 1985; 260: 10 346–52.
and basic fibroblast growth factor. Biochemistry 1994; 33: 13 72 Leung LL. Interaction of histidine-rich glycoprotein with fibrin-
918–27. ogen and fibrin. J. Clin. Invest. 1986; 77: 1305–11.
56 Olsen HM, Parish CR, Altin JG. Histidine-rich glycoprotein 73 Lawler JW, Slayter HS, Coligan JE. Isolation and characteriza-
binding to T-cell lines and its effect on T-cell substratum adhe- tion of a high molecular weight glycoprotein from human blood
sion is strongly potentiated by zinc. Immunology 1996; 88: platelets. J. Biol. Chem. 1978; 253: 8609–16.
198–206. 74 Baenziger NL, Brodie GN, Majerus PW. A thrombin-sensitive
57 Burch MK, Blackburn MN, Morgan WT. Further characteriza- protein of human platelet membranes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
tion of the interaction of histidine-rich glycoprotein with heparin: 1971; 68: 240–43.
evidence for the binding of two molecules of histidine-rich 75 Walz DA, Bacon-Baguley T, Kendra-Franczak S, DePoli P.
glycoprotein by high molecular weight heparin and for the Binding of thrombospondin to immobilized ligands: specific
involvement of histidine residues in heparin binding. Biochemis- interaction with fibrinogen, plasminogen, histidine-rich glyco-
try 1987; 26: 7477–82. protein, and fibronectin. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 1987; 13:
58 Peterson CB, Morgan WT, Blackburn MN. Histidine-rich glyco- 317–25.
protein modulation of the anticoagulant activity of heparin. 76 Silverstein RL, Leung LL, Harpel PC, Nachman RL. Complex
Evidence for a mechanism involving competition with both anti- formation of platelet thrombospondin with plasminogen. Modu-
thrombin and thrombin for heparin binding. J. Biol. Chem. 1987; lation of activation by tissue activator. J. Clin. Invest. 1984; 74:
262: 7567–74. 1625–33.
59 Lane DA, Pejler G, Flynn AM, Thompson EA, Lindahl U. 77 Silverstein RL, Nachman RL. Thrombospondin-plasminogen
Neutralization of heparin-related saccharides by histidine-rich interactions: modulation of plasmin generation. Semin. Thromb.
glycoprotein and platelet factor 4 [published erratum appears in Hemost. 1987; 13: 335–42.
J. Biol. Chem. 1986; 261: 13 387]. J. Biol. Chem. 1986; 261: 78 Leung LL, Nachman RL, Harpel PC. Complex formation of
3980–86. platelet thrombospondin with histidine-rich glycoprotein. J. Clin.
60 Lin JJ, Warren KS, Wamboldt DD, Wang T, Lin JL. Tropo- Invest. 1984; 73: 5–12.
myosin isoforms in nonmuscle cells. Int. Rev. Cytol. 1997; 170: 79 Silverstein RL, Leung LL, Harpel PC, Nachman RL. Platelet
1–38. thrombospondin forms a trimolecular complex with plasminogen
61 Zhang JC, Donate F, Qi X et al. The antiangiogenic activity of and histidine-rich glycoprotein. J. Clin. Invest. 1985; 75: 2065–73.
cleaved high molecular weight kininogen is mediated through 80 Gorgani NN, Parish CR, Altin JG. Differential binding of
binding to endothelial cell tropomyosin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) to human IgG subclasses and
USA 2002; 99: 12 224–9. IgG molecules containing kappa and lambda light chains. J. Biol.
62 Gorodetsky R, Mou X, Blankenfeld A, Marx G. Platelet multi- Chem. 1999; 274: 29 633–40.
elemental composition, lability, and subcellular localization. Am. 81 Gorgani NN, Parish CR, Easterbrook Smith SB, Altin JG.
J. Hematol. 1993; 42: 278–83. Histidine-rich glycoprotein binds to human IgG and C1q and
63 Parry MA, Zhang XC, Bode I. Molecular mechanisms of plas- inhibits the formation of insoluble immune complexes. Biochem-
minogen activation: bacterial cofactors provide clues. Trends istry 1997; 36: 6653–62.
Biochem. Sci. 2000; 25: 53–9. 82 Gorgani NN, Altin JG, Parish CR. Histidine-rich glycoprotein
64 Landmann H. Studies on the mechanism of action of synthetic regulates the binding of monomeric IgG and immune complexes
antifibrinolytics. A comparison with the action of derivatives of to monocytes. Int. Immunol. 1999; 11: 1275–82.
benzamidine on the fibrinolytic process. Thromb. Diath. Haem- 83 Chang NS, Leu RW, Anderson JK, Mole JE. Role of N-terminal
orrh. 1973; 29: 253–75. domain of histidine-rich glycoprotein in modulation of macro-
65 Thorsen S. Differences in the binding to fibrin of native plas- phage Fc gamma receptor-mediated phagocytosis. Immunology
minogen and plasminogen modified by proteolytic degradation. 1994; 81: 296–302.
Influence of omega-aminocarboxylic acids. Biochim. Biophys. 84 Chang NS, Leu RW, Rummage JA, Anderson JK, Mole JE.
Acta 1975; 393: 55–65. Regulation of complement functional efficiency by histidine-rich
66 Wiman B, Wallen P. The specific interaction between plasmino- glycoprotein. Blood 1992; 79: 2973–80.
gen and fibrin. A physiological role of the lysine binding site in 85 Shatsky M, Saigo K, Burdach S, Leung LL, Levitt LJ. Histidine-
plasminogen. Thromb. Res. 1977; 10: 213–22. rich glycoprotein blocks T cell rosette formation and modulates
67 Jones AL, Hulett MD, Altin JG, Hogg P, Parish CR. Plasmino- both T cell activation and immunoregulation. J. Biol. Chem.
gen is tethered with high affinity to the cell surface by the plasma 1989; 264: 8254–9.
protein, histidine-rich glycoprotein. J. Biol. Chem. 2004; 279: 38 86 Saigo K, Shatsky M, Levitt LJ, Leung LK. Interaction of
267–76. histidine-rich glycoprotein with human T lymphocytes. J. Biol.
68 Saez CT, Jansen GJ, Smith A, Morgan WT. Interaction of Chem. 1989; 264: 8249–53.
histidine-proline-rich glycoprotein with plasminogen: effect of 87 Parish CR, Rylatt DB, Snowden JM. Demonstration of lym-
ligands, pH, ionic strength, and chemical modification. Biochem- phocyte surface lectins that recognize sulphated polysaccharides.
istry 1995; 34: 2496–503. J. Cell Sci. 1984; 67: 145–58.