
--- Page 1 ---
Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology
BASIC SCIENCES
Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein Modulates the Toxic
Effects of High-Dose Polyphosphate in Mice
Rida A. Malik ,* Ji Zhou ,* James C. Fredenburgh , Jeff Crosby, Alexey S. Revenko , Jeff S. Healey , Jeffrey I. Weitz
BACKGROUND: Polyphosphate (polyP), a procoagulant released from platelets, activates coagulation via the contact system and
modulates cardiomyocyte viability. High-dose intravenous polyP is lethal in mice, presumably because of thrombosis. Previously,
we showed that HRG (histidine-rich glycoprotein) binds polyP and attenuates its procoagulant effects. In this study, we
investigated the mechanisms responsible for the lethality of intravenous polyP in mice and the impact of HRG on this process.
METHODS: The survival of wild-type or HRG-deficient mice given intravenous synthetic or platelet-derived polyP in doses up to
50 mg/kg or saline was compared. To determine the contribution of thrombosis, the effect of FXII (factor XII) knockdown or
enoxaparin on polyP-induced fibrin deposition in the lungs was examined. To assess cardiotoxicity, the ECG was continuously
monitored, the levels of troponin I and the myocardial band of creatine kinase were quantified, and the viability of a cultured
murine cardiomyocyte cell line exposed to polyP in the absence or presence of HRG was determined.
RESULTS: In HRG-deficient mice, polyP was lethal at 30 mg/kg, whereas it was lethal in wild-type mice at 50 mg/kg. Although
FXII knockdown or enoxaparin administration attenuated polyP-induced fibrin deposition in the lungs, neither affected mortality.
PolyP induced dose-dependent ECG abnormalities, including heart block and ST-segment changes, and increased the levels of
troponin and myocardial band of creatine kinase, effects that were more pronounced in HRG-deficient mice than in wild-type
mice and were attenuated when HRG-deficient mice were given supplemental HRG. Consistent with its cardiotoxicity, polyP
reduced the viability of cultured cardiomyocytes in a dose-dependent manner, an effect attenuated with supplemental HRG.
CONCLUSIONS: High-dose intravenous polyP is cardiotoxic in mice, and HRG modulates this effect.
GRAPHIC ABSTRACT: A graphic abstract is available for this article.
Key Words: arrhythmias, cardiac ◼ cardiotoxicity ◼ factor XII ◼ polyphosphates ◼ thrombosis
Inorganic polyphosphates (polyPs) are linear polymers platelets are activated.5,6 Platelet polyP promotes coag-
of phosphate residues linked by high-energy phos- ulation by inducing FXII (factor XII) autoactivation,7–10
phoanhydride bonds.1 Each phosphate residue carries promoting FV (factor V) and FXI (factor XI) activation
a monovalent negative charge, rendering polyP highly by thrombin,11–13 and enhancing the stability of fibrin
anionic at physiological pH.2 PolyP is ubiquitous and clots.14–16 Therefore, platelet polyP appears to be an
varies in polymer length from a few to several thousand important physiological activator of coagulation.
phosphate units depending on the organism and the tis-
sue in which it is synthesized.2 In mammals, polyP has
See accompanying editorial on page 1671
been implicated in blood coagulation, innate immunity,
inflammation, cancer metastasis, cell proliferation, and
cell death.3,4 Therefore, polyP has myriad functions. PolyP also functions at the cellular level. PolyP is found
In humans, large amounts of polyP are found in the in the heart, kidneys, and brain.17–19 In cardiac mitochon-
dense granules of platelets.5,6 Platelet polyP, which is dria, polyP activates the mitochondrial permeability tran-
60 to 100 phosphate units in length, is released when sition pore, a nonselective pore in the inner mitochondrial
Correspondence to: Jeffrey I. Weitz, OC, MD, Thrombosis and Atherosclerosis Research Institute, 237 Barton St E, Hamilton, Ontario L8L 2X2, Canada. Email weitzj@taari.ca
*R.A. Malik and J. Zhou contributed equally.
Supplemental Material is available at https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/suppl/10.1161/ATVBAHA.124.320899.
For Sources of Funding and Disclosures, see page 1669.
© 2024 American Heart Association, Inc.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol is available at www.ahajournals.org/journal/atvb
1658 July 2024 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2024;44:1658–1670. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.124.320899
Downloaded
from
http://ahajournals.org
by
on
March
23,
2026
--- Page 2 ---
BASIC
SCIENCES
-
T
Malik et al HRG Modulates Polyphosphate Toxicity
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms Highlights
ASO antisense oligonucleotide • With high doses, intravenous polyphosphate is lethal
CK-MB creatine kinase myocardial band in mice.
• Lethality reflects cardiotoxicity rather than thrombosis.
DAPI 4ʹ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
• Histidine-rich glycoprotein protects against the
FV factor V
lethal effects of polyphosphate.
FXI factor XI
FXII factor XII
FXIIa activated factor FXII pretreatment with enoxaparin or knockdown of FXII with
HEK human embryonic kidney an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) rescued the mice
and attenuated thrombosis. The potential cardiotoxicity of
HRG histidine-rich glycoprotein
polyP was investigated by continuous monitoring of the
HRG−/− histidine-rich glycoprotein-deficient
ECG, by quantification of the levels of troponin I and the
LDH lactate dehydrogenase
myocardial band of creatine kinase (CK-MB) before and
PolyP polyphosphate
after polyP injection, and by assessment of the effects of
TAT thrombin-antithrombin
polyP on the viability of a cultured murine cardiomyocyte
cell line in the absence or presence of HRG. Finally, the
potential toxic effect of polyP on the kidneys was investi-
membrane that provides a permeation pathway for ions,
gated by measuring the creatinine levels before and after
solutes, and small proteins.20–22 By allowing their entry,
polyP injection and by examining the effect of polyP on
polyP may modulate cardiomyocyte viability because
the viability of cultured HEK (human embryonic kidney)
polyP depletion protects cardiomyocytes from ischemic
cells in the absence or presence of HRG.
injury.17,23 PolyP also alters the viability of kidney cells
although less is known about the mechanism.19
HRG (histidine-rich glycoprotein) is a 75-kDa gly-
METHODS
coprotein that is synthesized in the liver and that circu-
lates in plasma at 1 to 3 µmol/L.24 HRG modulates the The authors declare that all supporting data are available within
prothrombotic effect of intraperitoneal polyP injection the article (and the Supplemental Material).
in mice because compared with wild-type mice, HRG-
deficient (HRG−/−) mice exhibit increased thrombin gen- Reagents and Isolation of Platelet-Derived
eration and fibrin deposition, effects abolished with HRG polyP
supplementation.25 There are at least 2 mechanisms
The source of reagents and the methods for the isolation
by which HRG attenuates the prothrombotic effects of
of platelet-derived polyP, in vivo studies, histology, and cell
intraperitoneal polyP. First, HRG binds polyP and neu-
culture are available in the Major Resources Table in the
tralizes its procoagulant activities.25 Second, HRG binds Supplemental Material. Synthetic short-chain polyP, which was
FXIIa (activated FXII) and attenuates its capacity to pro- generously provided by Dr Thomas Staffel (70.5 CAREPHOS
mote autoactivation and to activate FXI.25–27 The relative 244; BK Giulini, GmbH, Ladenburg, Germany), was dissolved
importance of these 2 mechanisms is uncertain. in 20 mmol/L HEPES, pH 7.4, for the in vitro studies and in
When given by intravenous injection to mice, concen- 0.9% sterile saline for the in vivo studies without added cal-
trations of polyP up to 300 mg/kg cause death within cium. PolyP was isolated from platelets as described in the
Supplemental Material. The various polyP preparations were minutes.7,28,29 Mortality was attributed to overwhelming
subjected to TBE (tris-boric acid)-urea gel analysis and their
thrombosis, and consequently, high-dose intravenous
capacities to promote FXII autoactivation were compared. On polyP infusion is often used as a trigger of thrombosis
TBE-urea gel analysis, the size distribution of platelet-derived
in animal models. However, neither the protective effect
polyP was like that of synthetic short-chain polyP from BK
of HRG nor the potential cardiotoxicity of polyP has
Giulini and commercially available polyP-100 from Kerafast
been considered. Because intraperitoneal polyP induces (Boston, MA), whereas longer polyP polymers were evident in
thrombosis that is exaggerated with HRG depletion and synthetic long-chain polyP from BK Giulini (Figure S1A). All
attenuated with FXII depletion, we set out to determine the polyP preparations promoted FXII autoactivation to a simi-
whether HRG and FXII depletion have the same oppos- lar extent (Figure S1B). PolyP concentrations used in this study
ing effects in the intravenous polyP model. To explore are given in terms of phosphate monomer (NaPO ) concentra-
3
the protective effects of HRG, we compared the survival tion as described previously.3,6
of wild-type and HRG−/− mice given increasing intrave-
nous doses of synthetic or platelet-derived polyP. The Mice
contribution of thrombosis to the lethal effects of intra- HRG−/− mice were maintained on a pure C57BL/6N back-
venous polyP was investigated by determining whether ground (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, MA) after >10
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2024;44:1658–1670. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.124.320899 July 2024 1659
Downloaded
from
http://ahajournals.org
by
on
March
23,
2026
--- Page 3 ---
T
-
SECNEICS
CISAB
Malik et al HRG Modulates Polyphosphate Toxicity
generations of backcrossing.25,30,31 Wild-type C57BL/6J mice injection of 50 mg/kg polyP or an equivalent volume of saline.
were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, This dose of enoxaparin produced plasma anti-Xa and anti-IIa
MA) and were bred in-house for at least 5 generations. Mice levels of 1.2±0.2 and 0.5±0.1 U/mL, respectively (Figure S5),
were housed in Micro-Isolator cages exposed to a 12-hour consistent with the reported anti-Xa/anti-IIa ratio of enoxaparin
constant light-dark cycle and were given free access to food of about 3 to 1.32,33 The anti-Xa level was within the reported
and water. Weight- and age-matched female mice were used therapeutic range of 0.6 to 1.0 IU/mL.32,33
for all the experiments. Blood was collected, and serum and
plasma were prepared as described in the Supplemental
ECG Monitoring
Material. All animal utilization protocols were approved by the
To assess for cardiotoxicity, the ECG was continuously moni-
Animal Research Ethics Board at McMaster University, and
tored after induction of anesthesia using an animal BioAmp
studies were performed according to the Canadian Council on
recorder (AD Instruments) and subdermal electrodes (AD
Animal Care guidelines.
Instruments, Sydney, Australia) inserted into the right hind foot,
left chest/breast, and right neck-shoulder area. ECG tracings
Intravenous polyP Injection in Mice
were recorded starting 2 minutes before jugular vein cannu-
HRG−/− and wild-type mice were anesthetized using a combi- lation and continuing until 30 minutes after polyP or saline
nation of oxygen (0.5 L/min) and isoflurane (1%–4%) deliv- injection or until death. The ECG tracings were analyzed by 3
ered by face mask. After the skin was aseptically prepared, the investigators (R.A.M, J.Z., and J.S.H., an electrophysiologist),
jugular vein was exposed via a midline incision in the neck and who were blinded to treatment allocation, using a combination
a cannulus (polyethylene tubing) was inserted and secured in of visual inspection and LabChart 8 software (AD Instruments,
place with a suture. Synthetic or platelet-derived polyP (10– Dunedin, New Zealand).
50 mg/kg in saline) or an equivalent volume of saline was
given intravenously via an infusion pump (Harvard Apparatus,
Levels of Biomarkers
Holliston, MA) at a rate of 2 µL/min per g. Both the synthetic
Serum levels of murine troponin I and CK-MB were quantified
and platelet-derived polyP preparations tested negative for
using immunoassays (Biomatik, Cambridge, Ontario, Canada)
endotoxin activity in a screening assay (Pierce Endotoxin
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma creati-
Chromogenic Kit from Thermo Fisher). For comparison pur-
nine levels were quantified using a kit purchased from Crystal
poses, an intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg polyP produces a
Chem (Elk Grove Village, IL). Plasma thrombin- antithrombin
circulating polyP concentration of about 7 mmol/L assuming
(TAT) complex levels were quantified by immunoassay
a 1-mL blood volume for a 25-g mouse. The plasma and tissue
(Affinity Biologicals, Ancaster, Ontario, Canada) as described
samples were collected 30 minutes after treatment with either
previously.25 saline or polyP or at the time of death if it occurred earlier. Mice
were euthanized via cervical dislocation, blood was collected
via puncture of the inferior vena cava, and plasma or serum was Effects of polyP on Cultured Cells
prepared as detailed in the Supplemental Material (Figure S2).
Mouse cardiomyocyte HL-1 and HEK293 cell line were cul-
The lungs, liver, heart, and kidneys were removed for histologi-
tured to about 60% confluence in 8-well chambers coated with
cal analysis.
fibronectin (10 µg/mL per well). The cells were exposed to
polyP in concentrations up to 42 mmol/L or buffer for up to 24
Effects of HRG Supplementation, FXII hours. Cell cytotoxicity was assessed by measuring the levels
of LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) in the culture medium using
Knockdown, or Treatment With Enoxaparin
a commercial kit (Thermo Fisher, Grand Island, NY). The effect
To investigate the potential protective effects of HRG and the
of polyP on cell structure was assessed by staining for actin
contribution of FXII in this model, some HRG−/− mice were
filaments (F-actin) after the cells were fixed with 4% para-
given a retro-orbital injection of 6 mg/kg of human HRG before
formaldehyde for 30 minutes, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton
the intravenous administration of 30 mg/kg polyP. This dose of
X-100 in PBS, and blocked by incubation with 1% BSA in PBS
supplemental human HRG was chosen because it raises the
for 1 hour at room temperature. Actin filaments were stained
plasma HRG concentration to 1.5 to 2 µmol/L, which is similar
with 1X Phallodin-iFluor-488 (Cayman Chemicals, Ann Arbor,
to that in wild-type mice.31
MI), and the nuclei were stained with DAPI (4ʹ,6-diamidino-
To determine whether thrombosis was responsible for the
2-phenylindole). The cells were imaged using the Olympus
toxicity of polyP, we examined the effect of FXII knockdown
BX41 fluorescence microscope equipped with a DP72 cam-
or enoxaparin. The levels of FXII in wild-type or HRG−/− mice
era (Center Valley, PA), and images were assessed using the
were knocked down with a liver-directed, mouse-specific FXII-
ImageJ software, version 1.48 (National Institutes of Health,
directed ASO generously provided by Ionis Pharmaceuticals
Bethesda, MD).
(Carlsbad, CA).25 The FXII ASO was administered subcutane-
ously at a dose of 20 mg/kg twice weekly for 4 weeks (Figure
Statistical Analysis
S3), and the extent of knockdown was assessed by comparing
hepatic mRNA and plasma FXII levels (Figure S4) before and All results are presented as mean±SD. Unless otherwise
after ASO administration as described previously.25 Treatment stated, experiments were performed at least 3×. The Shapiro-
with FXII ASO significantly reduced FXII levels by over 99% Wilk test was used to test for normality, and the significance of
(P<0.001; Figure S4). Enoxaparin (10 mg/kg) was given differences was determined by 1- or 2-way ANOVA followed by
via the retro-orbital vein 30 minutes before the intravenous the Holm-Sidak or Tukey comparison test. SigmaPlot, version
1660 July 2024 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2024;44:1658–1670. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.124.320899
Downloaded
from
http://ahajournals.org
by
on
March
23,
2026